---
layout: default
image: /assets/images/hackers-1.jpg
title: data science
---


<style>
h2 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
h3 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
pre {
    line-height: 1.15em;
}
pre code {
    font-size: 0.9em;
}
</style>



## Python web servers


**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}


### Learning objectives
By the end of this tutorial you will:

<ul class="hash-table">
    <li>Have an improved understanding of what a web server is.</li>
    <li>Be introduced to the concept of <i>decorators</i> in Python.</li>
    <li>Be able to write and run a web server for an arbirary Python module.</li>
    <li>Be familiar with the fastAPI Python package.</li>
    <li>Be introduced to the heroku web app service.</li>    
</ul>


### Requirements
Install the [fastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) and 
[uvicorn](https://www.uvicorn.org/) Python packages using conda. 
The first is used to create a webserver and/or API and the second is used
to run a webserver, to communicate information between your Python code 
and a network (e.g., localhost:8888).

```bash
conda install fastapi uvicorn -c conda-forge
```


### Extending the records package
<div class="alert alert-info">
This tutorial builds upon completion of the instructions in notebook 12.0, 
so you should first complete that assignment which will instruct you to 
create a Python package called 'records'.
</div>

In the last tutorial you created a Python package called `records`. Here 
we are going to create a new entry-point to this package. Whereas previously
we have created entry points as command line interfaces (CLIs) -- where you can 
call a function from your terminal -- here we will instead be creating a
web server entry point, where functions can be executed through your 
web browser. Technically, this is called a web server gateway interface (WSGI;
pronounced like whiskey).

Our web server will be written in a module called `app.py`. Create a new 
empty file at `records/records/app.py` so that your package looks like the
file tree below.

```bash
records/
├── setup.py
└── records/
    ├── __init__.py
    ├── app.py    
    └── records.py
```

## Your first web app
In the `app.py` file enter the following code, which is copied from the 
introductory tutorial from [fastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/). If at
any point you get stuck in this tutorial, try reading the fastapi docs for 
more information. This is a really well written library with really nice
documentation.

In this tutorial we will incrementally build up our web app, starting with 
a very simple example and becoming more complex. Let's start with the 
typical simple exercise of a function that says "hello world". 

```python
from fastapi import FastAPI

app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/")
def root():
    return {"message": "Hello World"}
```

This code is similar to Python scripts we have seen before, but it includes
a new feature you haven't seen before, called a <i>decorator</i>. Decorators
are a feature in Python that start with the @ character, and are written on
the line directly above a function definition. Decorators *modify* the way 
a function runs. That is all you really need to know about it for now.

In this case the decorator is `@app.get('/')`, meaning it is calling the 
function `get()` from the the FastAPI class instance `app`, with the argument
`'/'`. Since this script is pretty short, let's walk through it line-by-line.


1. First we imported the FastAPI Class object from the fastapi package.

2. Next we created an instance of this class and named in `app`. 

3. In the final step we created a function called `root()` that simply returns
a dictionary with the key "message" and value "Hello World". The only tricky 
thing here is the decorator. The decorator is designating the <i>path</i> 
where the returned result of the `root()` function should be sent. It will be
sent to the root location of the server address (`/`). As an example, we will
be running a local server (just like we do when running a jupyter notebook 
server) and it will serve to `localhost:8000`, which you will view in your 
web browser. When I say this result will be routed to `/`, what I really 
mean is it will be routed to localhost:8000`/`.


### Running the app
To run the app we now just need to call a server tool and point it to the
corrent entry point in the code where the app exists. This is a similar 
syntax to when we pointed to a specific function in the setup.py file to 
define a CLI entry point.

Here we will be using the `uvicorn` server, and *call it from the terminal* as
a command line tool. Like other servers we've run before, you can just leave
this running in the corner of your screen until you want to stop it. As long
as it is running your server will be accessible. Here we give it the option
`--reload` which means that as we make changes to our code it will automatically
reload to update the server.

```bash
# called from within records/ repo directory.
# argument points to records folder, app.py file, app instance
uvicorn records.app:app --reload
```
<pre style="background-color: lightgrey; padding:10px">
<font color="#4E9A06">INFO</font>:     Uvicorn running on <b>http://127.0.0.1:8000</b> (Press CTRL+C to quit)
<font color="#4E9A06">INFO</font>:     Started reloader process [<font color="#34E2E2"><b>488393</b></font>] using <font color="#34E2E2"><b>watchgod</b></font>
<font color="#4E9A06">INFO</font>:     Started server process [<font color="#06989A">488395</font>]
<font color="#4E9A06">INFO</font>:     Waiting for application startup.
<font color="#4E9A06">INFO</font>:     Application startup complete.
</pre>

Now open your browser to the address shown by the server, likely 
[localhost:8000](localhost:8000). You should see a single JSON result
showing "message", "Hello World". Success. Your Python function is 
writing its results to this web address. 


### So what?
In this simple example we can see that the <i>returned value</i> of the 
function `root()` is printed to the local network address on port 8000
at the `/` (root) path. Very simple, right? But why is this useful? 

Well, following 
from this example, we could imagine writing any arbitrary Python code to 
return any kind of results to a webpage. This becomes especially powerful 
when we begin to use the web browser to <i>receive inputs</i> as well. 
This can now replace the need for a command-line interface. Furthermore,
if the web server is made public, then *any user* could interact with your
program *from any browser*.


## RESTful API
Let's go to the next step: adding arguments to our functions. 
To do this you just add need to add arguments to the function being served 
as the endpoint. For example, our root function can now take an optional 
`name` argument with a default value of 'person'. Modify your code to 
include the following updates:

```python
from fastapi import FastAPI

app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/")
def root(name="person"):
    return {"message": f"Hello World to you, {name}"}
```

Save the app.py file after making this change and you should see your 
browser update automatically. Now try modifying the URL to enter a
params argument to the root path like in ths example: 
[localhost:8000/?name=Phylo](localhost:8000/?name=Phylo).

### Serving JSON data
Great. Let's extend our script with even further. In this case we will return 
JSON formatted data from a database, just like the GBIF API. For simplicity
we will just use a pandas dataframe to represent the database, but more 
commonly web sites/servers will use a different kind of database, like SQL,
which is faster for getting individual results from a very large database. 
But that is beyond the scope of our current interest, and pandas will work fine
for now. Add code to your script so it looks like the example below:

```python
import json
import pandas as pd
from fastapi import FastAPI

# create the app as an instance of the fastAPI class
app = FastAPI()

# load the database once when the server starts
DATA = pd.read_csv(
    "https://eaton-lab.org/data/iris-data-dirty.csv",
    names=["trait1", "trait2", "trait3", "trait4", "species"],
)

# create a root endpoint that say's hello
@app.get("/")
def root(name="person"):
    "returns a hello world message in JSON"
    return {"message": f"Hello World to you, {name}"}

# create another endpoint for returning iris data
@app.get("/iris")
def iris(species=None):
    """
    returns iris data in JSON with option to subselect a species
    """
    # get subset or full data
    if species is not None:
        data = DATA.loc[DATA.species == species, :]
    else:
        data = DATA

    # convert to JSON and return to endpoint
    sdata = data.to_json(orient="index")
    jdata = json.loads(sdata)
    return jdata
```

We have now added a function called `iris()` that takes a species argument
and uses it to optionally select a subset of the pandas dataframe containing
the iris data set. The results are then converted to JSON format and returned.

After making these changes and saving the app.py file, visit 
[localhost:8000/iris](localhost:8000/iris) to see all of the data records,
 and also try entering params arguments such as 
[localhost:8000/iris?species=Iris-setosa](localhost:8000/iris?species=Iris-setosa)
to see only a subset of records returned that match your query. 
You just created a REST API!


### API documentation
One of the coolest features of fastAPI is that it automatically generates
documentation for your API as you write it. Simply visit the address
[localhost:8000/docs](localhost:8000/docs) and you can see all of the endpoints
for your API, including the parameters that they support, and you can even 
click on <kbd>Try it out</kbd> to enter the parameters and see the results.
Such a cool feature, I wish the GBIF API supported this!


### Assessment
<div class="alert alert-success">
    Commit and push the new app.py file to your GitHub records repo after
    you have tested it and are able to successfully run the api requests
    in the examples above. 
</div>


### A web app for any package or module
Let's now create a web app that will make this code publicly accessible 
instead of only being available on localhost. 

<div class="alert alert-info">
This part of the tutorial is optional, and a bit complicated, so you do not 
need to run it yourself -- but you are welcome to. 
</div>

I think this final step is worth walking through, even if it is complex, 
just so you have an idea of the steps involved with making your API 
globally accessible from a public URL. There are several ways
to deploy your Python code to run on a public server, but a great option is 
to use the *free* service [heroku](https://heroku.com/).

You can find instructions to install heroku for either Linux 
(WSL2) or OSX at the [following link](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/getting-started-with-python#set-up).
Unfortunately this tool cannot be installed using conda. My instructions 
for using heroku below are quite similar to those from the example in their 
getting-started docs. So if you get stuck be sure to take a look there as well.
You will need to create a heroku login on their website. It is all free. 
(Again, this is optional for now.)


### Setup for heroku
We will need to add three additional files so that your repo looks like 
the following file tree:

```bash
.
├── Procfile
├── records
│   ├── app.py
│   ├── __init__.py
│   └── records.py
├── requirements.txt
└── runtime.txt
```

We first need to create a file called `Procfile` that will tell heroku how 
to run the server. This simply contains the command we called to run uvicorn; 
here I tell it some additional details that I found online by googling 
'uvicorn on heroku':
```bash
# Procfile
web: uvicorn records.app:app --host=0.0.0.0 --port=${PORT:-5000}
```

Then create a file called requirements.txt, which tells the server how to
install all of the Python dependencies using `pip`. This simply lists the 
required packages one per line. List everything in the app that is not 
from the Python standard library:
```bash
# requirements.txt
requests
pandas
fastAPI
uvicorn
```

Then we need to create a runtime.txt file that says which version of 
Python to use:
```bash
# runtime.txt
python-3.7.10
```

### Deploy your app to a public URL
Now you can call the `heroku` command line tool from within your package
to create a new git *remote* that will host your heroku app. Remember, a 
remote is a location where a copy of your repo is stored. We usually use 
GitHub as a remote (and refer to it as origin), but here we will be using 
heroku as a remote. To create this new remote, call the heroku create 
command from within your package, which will assign your app a 
random name unless you provide one.

```bash
# login to heroku (opens your browser)
heroku login
```

```bash
# create a heroku app named 'hack-records' (if name is available)
heroku apps:create hack-records
```

Great, now use `git add` and `git commit` to commit all changes to your repo
*on the heroku remote*, including the addition of your new Procfile and 
requirements.txt, and runtime.txt. You can *also* push these changes to your
GitHub remote (origin) if you want. No harm.

```bash
# push updates to your heroku remote main branch
git add records/records.py records/app.py      # stage changed file
git add requirements.txt runtime.txt Procfile  # stage new files
git commit -m "heroku app created"             # commit changes
git push heroku main                           # push to heroku remote
```
When you push heroku will begin to install the app on the remote and will 
print some information like the following:

<pre style="background-color: lightgrey; padding:10px; max-height: 400px; font-size:0.8rem">
Enumerating objects: 10, done.
Counting objects: 100% (10/10), done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads
Compressing objects: 100% (6/6), done.
Writing objects: 100% (10/10), 2.04 KiB | 1.02 MiB/s, done.
Total 10 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
remote: Compressing source files... done.
remote: Building source:
remote: 
remote: -----&gt; Building on the Heroku-20 stack
remote: -----&gt; Python app detected
remote: -----&gt; Installing python-3.6.13
remote: -----&gt; Installing pip 20.1.1, setuptools 47.1.1 and wheel 0.34.2
remote: -----&gt; Installing SQLite3
remote: -----&gt; Installing requirements with pip
remote:        Collecting requests
remote:          Downloading requests-2.25.1-py2.py3-none-any.whl (61 kB)
remote:        Collecting pandas
remote:          Downloading pandas-1.1.5-cp36-cp36m-manylinux1_x86_64.whl (9.5 MB)
remote:        Collecting fastAPI
remote:          Downloading fastapi-0.63.0-py3-none-any.whl (50 kB)
remote:        Collecting uvicorn
remote:          Downloading uvicorn-0.13.3-py3-none-any.whl (45 kB)
remote:        Collecting urllib3&lt;1.27,&gt;=1.21.1
remote:          Downloading urllib3-1.26.3-py2.py3-none-any.whl (137 kB)
remote:        Collecting certifi&gt;=2017.4.17
remote:          Downloading certifi-2020.12.5-py2.py3-none-any.whl (147 kB)
remote:        Collecting idna&lt;3,&gt;=2.5
remote:          Downloading idna-2.10-py2.py3-none-any.whl (58 kB)
remote:        Collecting chardet&lt;5,&gt;=3.0.2
remote:          Downloading chardet-4.0.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (178 kB)
remote:        Collecting python-dateutil&gt;=2.7.3
remote:          Downloading python_dateutil-2.8.1-py2.py3-none-any.whl (227 kB)
remote:        Collecting numpy&gt;=1.15.4
remote:          Downloading numpy-1.19.5-cp36-cp36m-manylinux2010_x86_64.whl (14.8 MB)
remote:        Collecting pytz&gt;=2017.2
remote:          Downloading pytz-2021.1-py2.py3-none-any.whl (510 kB)
remote:        Collecting starlette==0.13.6
remote:          Downloading starlette-0.13.6-py3-none-any.whl (59 kB)
remote:        Collecting pydantic&lt;2.0.0,&gt;=1.0.0
remote:          Downloading pydantic-1.7.3-cp36-cp36m-manylinux2014_x86_64.whl (9.2 MB)
remote:        Collecting h11&gt;=0.8
remote:          Downloading h11-0.12.0-py3-none-any.whl (54 kB)
remote:        Collecting typing-extensions; python_version &lt; &quot;3.8&quot;
remote:          Downloading typing_extensions-3.7.4.3-py3-none-any.whl (22 kB)
remote:        Collecting click==7.*
remote:          Downloading click-7.1.2-py2.py3-none-any.whl (82 kB)
remote:        Collecting six&gt;=1.5
remote:          Downloading six-1.15.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (10 kB)
remote:        Collecting dataclasses&gt;=0.6; python_version &lt; &quot;3.7&quot;
remote:          Downloading dataclasses-0.8-py3-none-any.whl (19 kB)
remote:        Installing collected packages: urllib3, certifi, idna, chardet, requests, six, python-dateutil, numpy, pytz, pandas, starlette, dataclasses, pydantic, fastAPI, h11, typing-extensions, click, uvicorn
remote:        Successfully installed certifi-2020.12.5 chardet-4.0.0 click-7.1.2 dataclasses-0.8 fastAPI-0.63.0 h11-0.12.0 idna-2.10 numpy-1.19.5 pandas-1.1.5 pydantic-1.7.3 python-dateutil-2.8.1 pytz-2021.1 requests-2.25.1 six-1.15.0 starlette-0.13.6 typing-extensions-3.7.4.3 urllib3-1.26.3 uvicorn-0.13.3
remote: -----&gt; Discovering process types
remote:        Procfile declares types -&gt; web
remote: 
remote: -----&gt; Compressing...
remote:        Done: 86.9M
remote: -----&gt; Launching...
remote:        Released v3
remote:        https://hack-records.herokuapp.com/ deployed to Heroku
remote: 
remote: Verifying deploy... done.
To https://git.heroku.com/hack-records.git
 * [new branch]      main -&gt; main
</pre>

The app is now live! Following from instructions in the heroku documentation,
we can tell it to use one "worker" to run our server (I think on the free 
tier you are limited only a few workers total).

```bash
# scale how many concurrent requests your server can handle
heroku ps:scale web=1
```

Now you should be able to visit your app at https://{app-name}.herokuapp.com.
Check out my working example for this tutorial. We can see that there are 
working endpoints to run each of our defined functions, and even an automated
documentation endpoint.

- root: [https://hack-records.herokuapp.com/](https://hack-records.herokuapp.com/)
- docs: [https://hack-records.herokuapp.com/docs](https://hack-records.herokuapp.com/docs)
- iris: [https://hack-records.herokuapp.com/iris](https://hack-records.herokuapp.com/iris)
- iris query "species=Iris-setosa": [https://hack-records.herokuapp.com/iris?species=Iris-setosa](https://hack-records.herokuapp.com/iris?species=Iris-setosa)



### A route for your code
If you were able to get all of that to work then congratulations, amazing!
Here's one more challenge for you... you could add another function to your
app.py script that will return results of a request to your Records class
object. 

How would you go about this? I would start by importing your class from 
the records module, and then creating a function that returns its json result 
to a specific endpoint. Here I use the `get_single_record()` function for now
since it is much faster than querying all records.

```python
# example code to add an endpoint to run the records.Records function
from records.records import Records

@app.get("/gbif")
def gbif(genusKey=3171670, year="2000,2020"):
    "returns a specific gbif query as JSON"
    rec = Records(genusKey=genusKey, year=year)
    return rec.get_single_record()
```


As you can see from this example, we could create a public endpoint to 
run *any arbitrary Python code*. This is the reason that Python is used
so widely for web development *as a backend server*. The only thing left
to do to create fancy looking web or mobile app is to design the front-end
which includes things like buttons or forms to accept user input which 
could be sent to your API to get a response. Pretty cool!
