---
layout: default
image: /assets/images/hackers-1.jpg
title: git collab assignment
---


<style>
h2 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
h3 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
pre {
    line-height: 1.25em;
}
pre code {
    font-size: 0.9em;
}
</style>


### Assignment

- Fork the repo of the user directly below you on the [repos page](https://eaton-lab.org/hack-the-planet/pages/repos.html)
- Clone your forked repo to your computer.
- Open the folder in your text editor.
- Read the Users proposal.md file on GitHub.
	- Follow any links documentation for packages they plan to use and browse
	this to gain an understanding of what this package is for, and how it works.
- Create a new file in the top-level of their directory called `paired-programming.md`
- In this markdown file write headings and paragraphs to answer the following
questions. The goal here is to provide feedback to the other student from the
perspective of one of their peers. Let them know what you do and don't understand
about the project given what is currently present.

	- Goal of the project: Is it clear to you from the proposal.md how the 
	goal can be accomplished using Python and the specified packages?

	- The Data: Is it clear to you from the proposal.md what the data for
	this project is, or will look like? 

	- The code: (Look at the Python code files in detail first and try to 
	comprehend a bit of what is written so far) 

		- Does the current code include	a proper skeleton (pseudocode) for starting this project? 
		- What can this code do so far?
		- Given the project description, what are some *individual functions* that
		could be written to accomplish *parts* of this goal? 

	- Code contributions/ideas: See description below for what to write here.


- Your goal is to *try* to contribute to this student's project. It is OK
if you don't fully understand the code, or even the project goal. But hopefully
from the proposal you understand at least some parts of it. For example, the user
at some point plans to create a scatterplot with Bokeh, and they included a link
to the bokeh documentation. You can contribute by creating a new file called
bokeh_plot.py and trying to create simple plot for what you imagine they will
eventually hope to do with their data. Or as another example, they describe that
they plan to organize data from a REST API into a dataframe, but they haven't
written the code to do this yet. You can try to write a class or function to 
do this, and put it either in their existing module, or in a new module file.
**Your goal is to try to make a contribution to the code**. (If you're unsure
even after reading their proposal very carefully how you can contribute to 
their project, then please message me in the chat and I will help.)

After making your contribution describe it in the Code contribution section
of the `paired-programming.md` file. 


### Submitting assignment

Once you've made your changes to the code, you can commit your changes and 
push to the remote, and then raise a pull request to make the other user 
aware of your proposed changes. We will read the pull requests and give a 
grade on your effort. 

```
# stage and commit changed files to your forked copy of their repo
git add src/bokeh_plot.py
git add paired-programming.md
git commit -m "added a bokeh plot example module"
git push origin main

# then go to the GitHub page of your forked copy of their repo and 
# raise a pull request.
```
