---
layout: default
image: /assets/images/hackers-1.jpg
title: git collab assignment
---

<style>
h2 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
h3 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
pre {
    line-height: 1.25em;
}
pre code {
    font-size: 0.9em;
}
</style>


### Projects: a minimal working example

Your goal for Monday's class is to produce a minimal working example of your
project. This includes two key components: 

1. Developing the code of your project to run and produce something (even 
if the thing it produces is far from your intended final product).

2. Updating your README file to include instructions for running the minimal
working example of your code. I should be able to clone your repo, install
any dependencies (as described in your README), and run this block of code
successfully.

<div class="alert alert-info">
If you have already produced a minimal working example and documented it in 
your README file then that is great. Your task for Monday is simply to 
continue working on your project and to make new commits. If you want advice
or help with any aspects of your code please reach out on the chatroom and I 
will be happy to provide feedback.
</div>


### Prioritizing 

Let's imagine that my project goal was to develop a webapp. My plan
for the final product is for it to be served on a publicly accessible URI
(perhaps using heroku), and to include several interactive plots displaying
up to date information fetched from a public REST API. 

So, there are at least three major steps to developing my program: (1) write
code to serve a webapp; (2) write code to generate plots from data; and 
(3) write code to fetch data from a REST API and format it for my use.

These three steps may take a few weeks to complete. I will need to develop
each step, and some steps are dependent on results from the other steps. So 
how should I best plan the development? 

My recommendation is always to start by trying to develop a working 
entrypoint to the program. This can be a Python API, a CLI, or GUI/webapp.
This provides the minimal framework for you to test your code, and particularly
to do so in the context of how you expect a user to eventually use your 
program. 

### Steps

In the example webapp project described above, I would first prioritize 
getting a webapp server to run, since that is the user-facing component of 
my project. This would be as simple as taking the most basic example from 
the documentation of the webapp server (e.g., streamlit) and copying it 
into your repo. Done, you now have a webapp server. You can start the server
from the command line and interact with it on localhost in your browser.

Next, I would begin to remove the components of that webapp that I don't need,
such as the plots and data that were written into it. I will begin to develop
my own plots. Here I will benefit from having developed the webserver component
first, since the plots that I develop can now be embedded and viewed 
directly in the webapp. This will likely save me a lot of time compared to 
developing the plots first, and perhaps finding later that they do not look 
or work right when moved from a jupyter notebook to the webserver framework.
To generate these initial plots I would download a single test dataset 
(e.g. CSV) that I could use, or else generate one randomly with numpy. But 
I would take care at this step to ensure the data that I am developing the 
plotting code for will be representative of the full range of data that is
likely to be fetched from the REST API.

Finally, updating my data files from the REST API would likely be my third 
step. Even though this step is relatively easy, it doesn't get me closer to 
having a working example of my program. I only need a single example dataset
to work on steps 1 and 2, not a continually updating one. 

### Drafting and then polishing

To be clear, the order of steps described above is likely to be only 
steps 1, 2, and 3 out of what might eventually become 10 or 20 steps in total.
Later steps will likely involve revisiting the webapp server code, 
or the plotting code, and refining these further. Steps 1-3 here are simply
plans for getting to a first working example of the app. A draft. Once you 
have this working draft it will be much simpler for you to refine and polish 
the code to improve your project. 



### Another example (CLI tool)
In case the first example feel too different from your project here is another
example. Consider a project aimed at producing a command line tool to analyze
some input data that is provided as an argument by the user. The first three
steps would then be: (1) write a CLI interface; (2) write code to read the 
input data; (3) write code to perform an analysis. 

Here steps 1 and 2 are clearly much simpler than step 3, and so you should 
prioritize those components. Designing the CLI interface was already part of 
your proposal, and so you should have a plan for this. Before even starting 
the analysis steps I would write steps 1 and 2 to load the user inputs and 
simply print to the user that this was successfully done. Something like 
this: 

```bash
# write your CLI interface (write a __main__.py and setup.py file)
myprogram --data data.csv --option1 100 --option2 0.5
```
And it would produce an example output like below, where you can simply put
print statements in your code to report what is happening in each step. Later
you can remove these print statements (or, use *logging* as described in one
of your readings for this week).

```bash
# this could be done by inserting print() commands into your code
myprogram started.
received arguments: data=data.csv, option1=100, option2=0.5
parsing data.csv with pandas
loaded data file with the following columns: ...
```

Steps 1 and 2 are complete. You can now begin to develop your analysis code
and anytime you want to test the entire program you can simply call it from
the command line. 

