---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
layout: default
title: PATH-variable
---

### PATH and programs 

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}


### Where are programs stored on my computer?
When you purchase a new computer it comes to you pre-loaded with tons
of software programs. This includes the things you are already familiar
with, like programs for email and games, but also a huge collection of 
programs that are used by your operating system to perform its work. 
This includes the unix programs that we've begun to learn about. 
These are stored in a location in your filesystem that is relatively
'deep' -- near the root (/) -- such as in `/bin` or `/usr/bin`. 
These folders are protected by your system such that they can only
be edited by users with administrative privileges. Which makes sense, 
you don't want to make changes to these programs and break them, or 
your system would be caput. The set of programs that will be available
differs among different operating systems and versions, but is generally
similar. 

```bash
# see all the program names in /bin
ls -l /bin
```

You can see that among the list of program names from the command above, 
it includes a file named `ls`. That's right, that file is the `ls` program 
itself. We can actually call the `ls` program by writing the full path
to that <i>executable</i> file, and it will have the same result as above.


```bash
# see all the program names in /bin
/bin/ls -l /bin
```

A relevant question, then, is how does the terminal know which programs 
are available, and allow us to type in only their names to call them? 
<i>Where does the terminal look for software?</i>


### Variables in bash
To answer this, we will need to take a digression to explain variables. 
Almost every computer language uses variables as a way of <i>assigning</i>
an object to a name that can be used to reference it over and over again. 
Usually the `=` operator is used to create variables (e.g., `x = 3`, 
but even this differs among languages (e.g., you may be familiar 
with the syntax of `x <- 3` in R). Variables are also used in the shell 
programming languages, like bash. Here we use the `=` operator without
any spaces between it and the values (e.g., `x=3`). 

```bash
# create a variable
x=3

# retrieve that variable's value using $
echo $x
```

### Default shell variables
As we learned in lecture, your shell stores a lot of information as 
variables behind the scenes. This includes variables that tell it how
to display colors and text in the terminal, how to keep track of its
own history, how to generally behave, and <i>importantly</i>, 
where to look for software or files that can be used for tab auto-completion.


### The `PATH` variable
The `PATH` variable is a colon-separated list of filepaths showing the order
in which your shell searches directories for executable binaries -- programs
that can be called by name from the command line. This is referred to as a 
variable because it is a value that is temporarily stored to the name `PATH` 
when you open a terminal. Use `echo` in your shell to print the value of
your $PATH variable. A simple one might look like the example below:

```bash
# show the $PATH variable where software is searched
echo $PATH
```
```bash
/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin
```

The example above includes only the locations of system-wide software -- 
all of the paths are pointing to filepaths that not in a user space, 
i.e., descended from `/home/username` on linux or `/Users/username` on 
OSX. By contrast, and as we'll learn more about in the coming weeks, 
we will often wish to install 'local' software within our own user
spaces. This is software that will be completely isolated from the
system softare that we definitely do not want to mess up. You can 
see in my PATH below that I have additional filepaths including 
`~/miniconda3/bin` and `~/gems/bin` (notice I'm using `~` as an alias
to reference my `/home/deren` prefix) that point to directories located
inside my home directory where additional programs are stored.

```bash
/home/deren/gems/bin:/home/deren/miniconda3/bin:/home/deren/miniconda3/condabin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin
```

### The order of `PATH`
Your PATH variable can be modified and this can be very useful for 
specifying a particular version of a program when multiple versions are 
available. A key example of this is the program `python`. You can call
`python` from the command line to execute Python scripts. Your system
comes pre-installed with a version of Python that is used to run system-wide
software. <i>We generally do not want to use this version of Python for 
scientific programming</i>. This is because we cannot easily update or change
that version without affecting our entire operating system. So, instead, 
we will install a separate version of Python on our computers within our 
userspace (somewhere within your home directory) and we will tell the PATH
variable to use this one instead of the system-wide version. Do not try to
do this just yet, we will go through the process of installing Python later.
For now, let's focus on how we know which version is being used.

You can find the filepath to a program that is located in your PATH by using 
the `which` or `whereis` commands. This will help to make clear how the PATH
variable works. It is <i>ordered</i>. The first directory in the path is searched
first, and then the next one, and then the next one. If python occurs in the first
directory, then this version will supercede any programs with the name `python` 
occurring in directories that are listed later in the PATH variable. The 
`which` command will show you which precise program is at the top of your PATH,
where as the `whereis` command will list all programs that contain the target in their
name and are present in your PATH. I will show the results from my laptop, 
since I have multiple versions of `python` installed.

```bash
which python
```
```bash
# example 'which' output
/home/deren/miniconda3/bin/python
```

```bash
whereis python
```
```bash
# example 'whereis' output
python: /usr/bin/python3.8 /usr/lib/python3.8 /usr/lib/python3.9 /usr/lib/python2.7 /etc/python3.8 /usr/local/lib/python3.8 /usr/include/python3.8 /home/deren/miniconda3/bin/python3.8-config /home/deren/miniconda3/bin/python3.8 /home/deren/miniconda3/bin/python
``` 


### The dotfiles
Dotfiles are <i>hidden files</i>, generally located in your home directory 
(e.g., `/home/deren` or `/Users/deren`), and which start with a dot (.) as
the first character in their filenames. By default, your shell and operating
system typically hide these files from your view, since you don't need to 
interact with them unless you are a hacker. 

Hacking these dotfiles can be really useful, especially for creating a more
pleasurable experience when interacting with your terminal. Here we will
edit one or more dotfiles to add some basic customization to your terminal. 
You are welcome to do further customizations on your own. 
Your shell uses these dotfiles by reading and loading the variables in them
prior to starting. By editing the variables in the files we customize the 
behavior of the shell.

First, it is important to be sure which type of shell you have, since this 
will determine which dotfile name we need to ecdit. This can be found 
by looking at the SHELL variable, like below. This will return either
`/bin/zsh` or `/bin/bash`. 

```bash
echo $SHELL
```

Be careful when editing this file, since a bad configuration <i>can</i> prevent
your terminal from opening properly. If this happens, do not worry, it can
be easily fixed by opening the dotfile with a text editor and changing it back
to its default settings. For this reason, let's start by creating a backup 
copy of our dotfile by using the `cp` command (be sure to specify the appropriate
dotfile for your system -- you can ensure this by typing only the beginning of the 
filename and pressing tab to complete the filepath automatically. If the name does
not autocomplete then you have started to write the path incorrectly. Take note 
of where you are located (e.g., `pwd`) and remember that the dotfiles are located
in your user home directory.)

```bash
# ensure I am in my HOME, and then create backup of my .bash_rc or .bash_profile, etc.
cd /home/deren
cp .bashrc .bashrc_backup
```

### Using a text-editor
You can use any text editor to edit the dotfiles. We will eventually learn a lot
more about powerful coding text editors, but they are not necessary just yet.
If you want, you can start to learn about one simple text-editor that you can use from
within your terminal called `nano` by watching a quick video [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jf0ZJZJ8jlI). 


### Editing your dotfile
<div class="alert alert-block alert-success">
	<b>Complete the tasks in this section to earn points for the assignment.</b> 
</div>
For this assessment you must create one edit to your shell's dotfile. We will 
add an alias, which is simply a new named variable that we will create that will
serve as a shortcut to call a command that is more tedious to type. One that 
I find indispensible is the alias `ll` (the lowercase letter L twice). We can 
create an alias in your dotfile by editing the file to add the following line
to it:

```bash
alias ll='ls -l'
```

After you have made the edit, you must then re-load the dotfile, which can 
be done by either closing and re-opening the terminal, or by calling 

```bash
# again, the dotfile name must be correct for you system (use tab-completion)
source ~/.bash_rc
```

Now that the alias is created and loaded when you type `ll` you should see 
the result that we expect to see when typing `ls -l`, which is to list the 
items in a directory with one item per line.

```bash
# call our new alias 
ll
```

If you get stuck in this section, try watching the videos below for step
by step instructions on customizing terminals.


### Optional: further customize your terminal
You do not need to follow all of the instructions in these videos, make
any changes that you find useful, and feel free to search for other tutorials
or videos for tips. Just take note that you must follow instructions for the 
appropriate shell type that you have (e.g., bash versus zsh). If you got stuck
on the section above, these videos might prove helpful to you.

- [A video on customizing an OSX bash terminal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vDOVEDl2z84)
- [A video on customizing an OSX zsh terminal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MSPu-lYF-A8) or 
- [A video on customizing a Windows-subsystem-for-Linux-2 terminal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kY4Ns260i2k)


### Assessment
<div class="alert alert-block alert-success">
	<b>Complete the tasks in this section to earn points for the assignment.</b> 
</div>

You should have already created a GitHub account in the previous tutorial. 
If not, please complete that assignment before proceeding. To get full points
for this assignment you must <b>upload</b> your shell's dotfile (`.bash_rc`, `.bash_profile`, or 
`.zshrc`) to your GitHub repository called hack-2-shell. You can do this by opening
your home folder, showing hidden files (those that start with a dot), and dragging
your dotfile to the GitHub repo to upload. Your dotfile must contain at least the
`ll` alias described above, any further changes are optional.

