---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
layout: default
title: bash-assessment
---


### Advanced bash tutorial

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}


To answer the following problem sets look back at the slides from lecture 1, feel free to use any cheat sheets, or tutorials, and definitely make use of google searches. The most powerful tool for learning to code is learning to search for answers. If you have a question about how to do something it is almost certain that someone else has asked that question before. But, for the purposes of this tutorial, I would also encourage you to challenge yourself, and to try to understand the answers the you find and how they accomplish the desired task.
Documenting your assignment

Your assignment is to creat a markdown document called README.md, or assignment.md, or whatever you wish to call it, and to save it in a repository in your github account. In this file you should document your answers to all of the problems below in the following format using markdown. Use a header for each question, then use plain text to copy the question, then use plain text to write your answer and link to any online resources that helped you, and finally include a code-block for your code and a code-block with your copied answer. Use an online markdown live editor to test your code, or the "preview" button on github to make sure that it is formatted to look clean and easily readable. An example is below:
Example Question and Answer

Parse the string X into a list of elements and then use the sort command to sort them in reverse alphanumeric order. X="apples,bananas,oranges,pancakes"

Looking at the man page of sort (or google for documentation) I see that it sorts lines of text, so I need to split the elements of X onto separate lines. Therefore, I used the substitution tools sed to replace "," with "\n". It also works on files, so I need to pipe the text of X into sed using echo. Finally, I sorted the substituted text using sort with the -r option to reverse it.

> echo $x | sed 's/,/\n/g' | sort -r

pancakes
oranges
bananas
apples

Follow this same format to answer the 4 questions below and save your answers to your markdown document on github. If you get stuck, ask your fellow classmates for help on the shared gitter chatroom page.
I. Get the data files

Download the following data files from the internet using the curl command: http://eaton-lab.org/pdsb/test.fastq.gz and http://eaton-lab.org/pdsb/iris-data-dirty.csv. Use the less or zless commands to look at the files. Then use the head command to print the first 5 lines from each file as output.
II. Clean the data

Use grep, uniq, sed. Check that all of the species names are spelled correctly in the file iris-data-dirty.csv. Also check for missing values stored as NA. Create a new file where mispelled names are replaced with the correct values, and lines with NA are excluded, and save it as iris-data-clean.csv. Use cut, sort and uniq to list the number of data values there are for each species in the new cleaned data file.
III. Summarize sequence data file

Find how many lines in the data file test.fastq.gz start with "TGCAG" and end with "GAG"
IV. Summarize sequence data file

Write a for-loop to separate the reads from the file test.fastq.gz based on the taxon name in the label, and write the reads to separately named files in the new directory called sorted_reads/. The answer to this question will require more than a single line. See the lecture materials about using variables in for-loops. This will also be tricky because each read in the data file spans four lines (this is a standard genetic sequence file format), so for each read that you correctly identify you must grab the line with the sequence data below it, as well as the repeat label after that, and the quality information line after that. For a hint, see additional options for the grep command that can be used to select multiple lines.
Save your file in your github repo

Do not forget to save your results in a markdown document in a README file, or other file, in a github repository under your account. We will be sharing these answers with each other in class next week. If you get stuck on the problems above ask for help from your class mates on the gitter chatroom page.