---
layout: default
image: /assets/images/hackers-1.jpg
title: visualization
---

<style>
h2 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
h3 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
pre {
    line-height: 1.25em;
}
pre code {
    font-size: 0.9em;
}
iframe {
  margin-top: 30px;
  margin-bottom: 30px;
}
</style>


## Markup languages
We have previously learned to write *Markdown*, a language for rendering
styled text in web browsers (or in jupyter notebooks). This is a sort of 
minimal language that provides a shortcut to writing its more complex and
verbose parent language, which is HTML (hyperlink text **markup** langauage).

Markup languages follow the syntax of nested structures described within
tags defined by chevrons and text. An example in HTML is a `div` element,
which can represent any general block of content on a page. This is 
described by an opening tag, then some content, and finally a closing
tag: `<div>...</div>`. These elements often have others nested within them, 
and they themseleves are nested in a broader HTML webpage. 


### Follow along
Throughout this tutorial you can follow along by typing the markup code
into the HTML section of [https://jsfiddle.net/](https://jsfiddle.net/). 
Press the <kbd>run</kbd> button in the upper left to run the code and 
render the page. This is really useful resource for learning HTML, CSS,
and JS interactively. I will use it here to embed examples as well.


### HTML, CSS, and JavaScript

Let's take a look at a basic webpage layout. This includes the outermost 
`<html>` tags, a body tag, and inside of the body, the content of the 
page. This page has a single h1 header that say's "Hello World". It is best
to think of markup tags as containers. The 
html tags are the outer container of the entire page, and the body is 
a container for the content of the page.

<iframe width="100%" height="175" src="//jsfiddle.net/dereneaton/w49r08nj/embedded/html,result/" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allowpaymentrequest frameborder="0"></iframe>


Most webpages will additionally include a `<head>` tag section at the top of
the document. This section includes a bunch of meta-data that helps the browser
to know what the page is about, and it also includes links to any css 
stylesheets and javascript libraries. You can think of this as analogous 
to the `import` statements in a Python script. 

In the jsfiddle examples you will notice that there are separate windows 
for entering CSS and JS, these are automatically linked to the HTML window
in this tool. Take not that you would usually create a separate 
file to hold this content and link to that file from the header.

In this example you can see that I added a div container around the 
'hello world' h1 element, and I assigned it an attribute `id=welcome`. 
You can assign any id to any element, and this allows you to add style
to it specifically from your CSS stylesheet. Click on the CSS tab below
to see how two styles were described, setting color on the `div` and `h1`
elements, respectively.


<iframe width="100%" height="325" src="//jsfiddle.net/dereneaton/b4a8f9uv/4/embedded/html,css,result/" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allowpaymentrequest frameborder="0"></iframe>


Let's not look at an example of adding JavaScript. Here, as with CSS,
you can write javascript in a separate file and link to it from the HTML
document. Because this example is simple, though, I will write the 
JS directly into the HTML. When this is done it usually goes at the 
end of the `body` element, inside of a tag called `script`. You can 
use javascript to change HTML content or attributes, to change CSS
styles, and to show or hide HTML elements. This simple example creates
the content for the second `h1` element in javascript.

<iframe width="100%" height="405" src="//jsfiddle.net/dereneaton/jxdgta1r/6/embedded/html,result/" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allowpaymentrequest frameborder="0"></iframe>


### Summary
So, webpages are composed of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. These simple
examples show the barebones of an example, but of course real web pages, 
and web-based data visualizations, can be much more complex. However, 
even very complex examples are composed simply of extensions of these
building blocks.


### SVG markup
How does this all relate to plotting again? Oh yeah, vector graphics.
So it turns out that vector graphics can be tightly integrated into this
framework to allow you to embed, position, style, and interact with shapes
the same way you do with html tags in a webpage. By doing so you can create
really powerful interactive graphics. This is the basis for many of the 
cool interactive data visualizations that you find in the New York Times, 
and is the basis for how libraries like `altair` create plots.

SVG stands for scalable vector graphics, and is a markup language similar
to HTML (actually its more similar to a flavor called XML). It is composed
of tags that describe distinct primitives (shapes) and how they should be 
arranged in space. Let's try a simple example. Here we create an `svg` tag
as the outermost element and set the dimensions of the element. Inside, 
we describe two primitives, a circle and a polygon, both of which have a 
number of attributes that are required to describe their size, position, 
and shape. As you can see in the CSS tab, we can add style to these 
elements, and even change or update it interactively, after the 
image content has already been described.

<iframe width="100%" height="300" src="//jsfiddle.net/dereneaton/mcq18563/7/embedded/html,css,result/" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allowpaymentrequest frameborder="0"></iframe>

### Vector-based drawings
So how do vector-based drawings work? Let's consider the case of creating
a scatterplot. Your code will describe the size of the canvas by providing
attributes to the `svg` element, and it will describe the size and position of 
points by listing many `circle` elements with attributes describing their 
position (cx, cy) and radius size (r). It will also create axes and axes 
labels using svg elements for lines and text. Finally, it can apply styles
to those elements either directly to the elements, or by wrapping the 
SVG element inside of HTML and using CSS or JavaScript. This latter style
is sometimes taken to the extreme, where the entire contents of the figure, 
including all svg elements, are described in the javascript `<script>` section
of the document.


Let's look at a very simple example like this:

<!-- <iframe width="100%" height="600" src="//jsfiddle.net/dereneaton/qy9ns3L5/11/embedded/" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allowpaymentrequest frameborder="0"></iframe>
 -->

<iframe width="100%" height="600" src="//jsfiddle.net/dereneaton/qy9ns3L5/65/embedded/html,css,result/" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allowpaymentrequest frameborder="0"></iframe>


And then a more complex example where the circle points are created
only by JavaScript code (don't worry if this one seems complex).

<iframe width="100%" height="600" src="//jsfiddle.net/dereneaton/qy9ns3L5/74/embedded/" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allowpaymentrequest frameborder="0"></iframe>

Finally, let's look at an example of a barplot created by `altair`.
You can see in this case that *all* of the work is off-loaded to javascript,
and the HTML simply contains a single element called `<div id="vis"></div>`.
The content of this element with id='vis' is created by the javascript.

<iframe width="100%" height="300" src="//jsfiddle.net/dereneaton/wb8fnpc9/3/embedded/js,html,result/" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" allowpaymentrequest frameborder="0"></iframe>


### Summary
Hopefully this has helped to begin to demystify data visualization and how
plotting libraries work. Next session we will explore this framework further
to understand how modern web-based mapping libraries work, which combine 
raster and vector graphics in a creative and powerful way. This is the basis
for how google maps works, and is just an extension of the methods you just
learned here.


## Resources
My favorite resource for learning about HTML, CSS, and JavaScript is the 
mozilla developer documentation. They have really nice tutorials that are
great for beginners. If you are interested in these topics I highly recommend
reading through the following four intro tutorials:


- [HTML](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML)
- [CSS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS)
- [JavaScript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript)
- [SVG](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG)
