---
layout: default
image: /assets/images/hackers-2.jpg
title: learning-git
---

# Learning the `git` command line tool

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}

### Learning objectives
By the end of this tutorial you should be familiar with 
git terminology, and be able to make changes to git repositories
using the command line git program. This tutorial will likely take
15-30 minutes to complete. 

### Introduction
The `git` program is a powerful tool not only for programmers but
also for any scientist interested in keeping data and analysis
scripts synced over multiple machines, and shared online.
But learning `git` can be intimidating to many beginners.
Many tutorials are aimed at developers working in large groups, where 
the collaborative workflows can seem overly complex and unnecessary to 
coders who are mostly writing code on their own, at least to begin with. 
But learning to use `git` and GitHub is still useful even when 
writing code on your own, and, it is actually much simpler 
to learn and use in this context. We will start simple and work
up to more complex workflows. By the end of this session you should
be comfortable with creating new *remote* repos on GitHub, 
syncing them to your *local* computer, and pushing changes back 
to the *remote* repo using `git`.

Here I will try to provide a simple introduction to `git`, and will also 
link to other resources online that I have found useful. Please see the 
[official git book](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) if you get stuck, 
or want to pursue further reading.


### Installation
Open a terminal and type `git`. If it is not yet installed your shell will
prompt you to install it. If you are on Linux (or WSL2) it will be installed
already.


### `git` is specific to your location
When you create a git repository, or convert an existing folder
into one, all this means is that the folder will contain a hidden
directory named `.git/`. This directory is where `git` will store 
all of the information it needs to do its work. You will never need
to look inside of that folder. Instead, you will use commands from
the program `git` to programmatically tell it how to operate. 

To use `git` on a repository, you must be located in that repo.
In other words, you must `cd` from your terminal into that location.
If you try a `git` command from a folder that is not a 
git repo (i.e., does not contain a `.git/` subfolder) then `git`
will raise an error. Let's try this now. We will call the `git status`
command from our $HOME folder, which itself should not be a `git` 
repository. This should raise the following error.

```bash
# move to home folder and call git status
cd ~
git status
```
<pre style="background-color:lightgray; padding: 10px">fatal: not a git repository (or any of the parent directories): .git
</pre>

Always read an error message carefully when you receive it. It is 
telling us that we are not in a git repo.


### Setup git
The program `git` is designed for collaboration. For this reason, it wants
to keep track of *who* makes changes to any given file. So before we start
using it we need to configure it to tell it who we are. This is done 
using the `git config` commands. You can set different configurations 
for specific git repositories, and/or you can also set a global configuration. In general, you will only need to set the global 
config, and only need to do this once. The global settings are 
stored in `~/.gitconfig` and can be set with the command below. 
You can read more about git configuration in the 
[git book chapter 1.6](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-First-Time-Git-Setup]).

Let's first check our existing global configuration. 
This shows the config of your username and email address,
and shows the file location where it is stored.
```bash
git config --list --show-origin --global
```
My git is already configured and so it looks like this:
<pre style="background-color:lightgray;padding:10px">file:/home/deren/.gitconfig     user.email=de2356@columbia.edu
file:/home/deren/.gitconfig     user.name=Deren
file:/home/deren/.gitconfig     core.editor=nano
</pre>

To set your global configuration run the following and enter your name
and email in place of mine. You can choose any name and email that you
want, but you probably want to set it to the same as your GitHub profile.
If there is a space in your name then you must surround it with quotes like
in the example below.
```
git config --global user.name "John Doe"
git config --global user.email johndoe@example.com
```

I also prefer to set the default code editor that git will use 
when it asks you to make changes to a file (something that 
git does when it encounters a conflict). This needs to be set 
to an editor that is installed on your system. I prefer to set 
a fast and simple terminal based editor for this, such as `nano`.
```
git config --global core.editor nano
```

<br>

## Commit changes to a repo
### Cloning a git repo
Let's clone our first repository. This creates an exact copy of a 
*remote* repo onto your *local* machine. We will start by cloning the
repo you created in the last session, called hack-2-shell. To clone
a repository you can go to its GitHub page online and click on the 
button labeled <kbd style="background-color:green">Code</kbd> 
to select the URL. (For now, we will select the first option, HTTPS,
but later we will switch to using the SSH option.)
When we clone this repo it will create a copy into your current 
directory, so beware of your location before doing so. Let's 
`cd` into our home directory and create a new directory called 
**hacks/** where you can store all your repos for this class.

```bash
# cd into $HOME
cd $HOME

# make a new directory here for storing class repos
mkdir hacks/

# cd into the hacks/ dir
cd hacks/

# clone 'hack-2-shell' (replace USERNAME with YOUR git username)
git clone https://github.com/USERNAME/hack-2-shell

# cd into hack-2-shell repo
cd hack-2-shell/
```

### Make changes to the README file
Let's make a change to the README file. To do this, we'll use the simple
`nano` text editor to open the file, write additional text into it,
and then save and close the text editor. Remember, `nano` requires
you to enter a set of hotkey commands to do things like save and 
close. These are listed along the bottom of the editor when it is 
open. The most important one is labeled Exit. 
For me, Exit is <kbd>^X</kbd>, which means hold the control key 
and press X (this may vary on Mac or Windows, maybe
it is the Alt or Windows key, etc.). This will ask you if you 
want to save any changes, and then it will close the editor. 

<div class="alert alert-block alert-success">
<b>Action:</b> Edit the README.md file to add a link (using Markdown)
to any videos or webpages that you used when creating your dotfiles. Add a description, such as "I followed instructions from this video to edit my 
.zshrc file."
</div>

```bash
# open the README file in the nano text editor
nano README.md

# remember you can exit nano by entering the 'Exit'
# hotkey commands listed at the bottom of the editor.
```

### Sync to the remote
We will now sync these changes to the *remote* repo on GitHub.
This involves **three steps**, which is all you need to memorize
to become a `git` user. These are the core basic commands: 
`add`, `commit`, and `push`. Run the commands below to sync your
changes to the *remote*. In the next section we will break this 
down step by step to better comprehend what each step is doing.
The final step will sync your changes to GitHub, and will require
you to enter your username and password. After it syncs, refresh 
your repo page on GitHub to see if the changes appear.

```bash
git add ./README.md
git commit -m "added links to README file"
git push
```

<br>

## Essential git commands

### git status
In addition to the three core `git` commands above, you will 
also want to know the essential command `git status`. This 
will tell you at any given time which of the three commands above you 
should call given the changes that have been made to your files.
Since we just **pushed** our changes, there should be no differences
between our local repo and the remote. Thus, when we call 
`git status` we should see the following:

```bash
git status
```
<pre style="background-color: lightgray; padding:10px">On branch main
Your branch is up to date with &apos;origin/main&apos;.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
</pre>

So what does this mean? 
First, it is telling us which branch we are on (main). 
Here, we did not create a separate branch on which to make our 
changes, instead we are still currently on the main branch.
As I mentioned in class, this is not the "best practice" 
when working on a collaborative project, but when you are 
working alone it usually fine, and it is a much simpler
framework for initially learning git. 

Next, it says that our branch is up to date with 'origin/main'. Here the
name 'origin' is referring to the *remote* copy of this repository, the 
one that is on GitHub. This is easy to remember if you think of 
'origin' as referring to the place where the repo was first created.

Finally, it says there is nothing to commit. This makes sense, since
we just pushed our changes to the remote, so they are already synced.
Below we'll make some changes to files and see how this message changes.

### git add

The command `git add` is the first in our series of three commands. 
It is used to tell `git` that a file has been updated or added to the
list of files to be tracked. It the git lingo this is means the file 
has been "staged for commit". 

Before we learn more, let's create 
three new files that we will use throughout the next few sections
to demonstrate what it looks like for files to be at different 
stages along the three-step process of syncing.

```bash
# create three new file in this directory
echo "hello world" > ./file-1.md
echo "hello world" > ./file-2.md
echo "hello world" > ./file-3.md
```

OK, we've created three new files inside of our git repo folder, each
with a different name and containing the text "hello world".
Does this mean that these files are now being tracked by `git`?
The answer is **no**. You can have files in a git repo folder
that are not *added* to it, and thus are not going to be synced 
between machines. These are termed *untracked* files. Let's
check `git status` to see this.

```bash
# git status will now show something different.
git status
```
<pre style="background-color: lightgray; padding:10px;">On branch main
Your branch is up to date with &apos;origin/main&apos;.

Untracked files:
  (use &quot;git add &lt;file&gt;...&quot; to include in what will be committed)
	<font color="#CC0000">file-1.md</font>
	<font color="#CC0000">file-2.md</font>
	<font color="#CC0000">file-3.md</font>

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use &quot;git add&quot; to track)
</pre>

You can see the output has now changed, there is a new section 
called "Untracked files" that shows the name of the three files 
that are not being tracked. We could leave these files as untracked 
if we wanted, but let's imagine we want some of these files to be 
part of our git repo. Reading the comment under the Untracked files
section above we can see that it is giving us instructions for 
how to start tracking these files. It says to use `git add`. 
Let's do this for two of the files, file-1.md and file-2.md. 

```bash
# add two files to the local git repo
git add file-1.md
git add file-2.md
```
Now we'll call `git status` again to see what has changed.

```bash
git status
```
<pre style="background-color: lightgray; padding:10px">On branch main
Your branch is up to date with &apos;origin/main&apos;.

Changes to be committed:
  (use &quot;git restore --staged &lt;file&gt;...&quot; to unstage)
	<font color="#4E9A06">new file:   file-1.md</font>
	<font color="#4E9A06">new file:   file-2.md</font>

Untracked files:
  (use &quot;git add &lt;file&gt;...&quot; to include in what will be committed)
	<font color="#CC0000">file-3.md</font>
</pre>

Looking at the first few lines of this message, 
you might ask "why does it say that my branch is up to date with 
origin/main if I just made changes to this repo? Shouldn't that mean
that they are out of sync?". The answer is: *not yet*. Although 
we've edited some files in this repo, we haven't yet **committed**
those changes, and so the changes are considered temporary for now.

You can also see that a new category has appeared in the status report,
in addition to *Untracked files* we now also see a list of files 
under *Changes to be committed*. This means that 
`git` is now tracking these files -- it knows they are different (or new).
The name of this new section hints at what we should do next. These have changes that need to be committed. So let's commit them. 

### git commit

You can think of a commit as a timestamp. To the extent `git` works
like a time machine, we are saving a point in time that you might 
later want to rewind to. A commit at this stage will save the changes
that have been made to all files listed in the *to be committed* category
(i.e., we don't need to call commit separately for every call of add).
It should be accompanied by a short but informative message about 
what the commit includes, by using the `-m` option:

```bash
# commit changes with a message about what it entails
git commit -m "added files 1 and 2."
```

Congratulations, you've made your first commit using `git`. 
Your local repo now has a time-stamped version of this new state.
Let's take a look at the status again to see what this looks like.

```bash
git status
```
<pre style="background-color: lightgray; padding:10px">On branch main
Your branch is ahead of &apos;origin/main&apos; by 1 commit.
  (use &quot;git push&quot; to publish your local commits)

Untracked files:
  (use &quot;git add &lt;file&gt;...&quot; to include in what will be committed)
	<font color="#CC0000">file-3.md</font>

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use &quot;git add&quot; to track)
</pre>

There is now a new status near the top of the message, telling us that
our branch is ahead of origin/main by 1 commit. And once again it tells
us what to do about it: *use git push to publish our local commits.*


### git push

This final command is used to push our commits to the remote repo.
After this step the new files and changes that we've made will appear
on GitHub when we visit the repo online. Given our current setup, 
it will ask you to enter your GitHub username and password to 
authenticate that you have permission to push these changes to the
remote repo. We will learn later how to enable password-less 
authentication. If we had created a separate branch we could 
specify the name of the branch that we want to push here as well.
By default it will push to origin main. The output that it writes
below is not very interesting.

```bash
# we could write `git push origin main` to be more explicit.
git push
```
<pre style="background-color: lightgray; padding:10px">Username for &apos;https://github.com&apos;: hackers-test
Password for &apos;https://hackers-test@github.com&apos;: 
Enumerating objects: 4, done.
Counting objects: 100% (4/4), done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads
Compressing objects: 100% (2/2), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 320 bytes | 320.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 3 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
To https://github.com/hackers-test/hack-2-shell
   90cdd7d..4a1782a  main -&gt; main
</pre>

At this stage you can call `git status` again and you will see that
our branch is once again 'up to date' with origin/main. This is 
true even though file-3.md exists as an untracked file in your 
local repo directory. It is fine to have some files that you keep
locally that you do not want to sync, in fact it is very common. 

<br>

## Branching

So what is the deal with branching? Branches are used to make changes
to a repo on a separate version that can exist alongside the main 
branch. This way you can test out new features while leaving the main
branch in working order. Imagine you are developing a complex new 
feature of a computer program, this might involve dozens or hundreds 
of commits, one for each time you make a substantial change to the code.
You can slowly develop this feature on a separate branch that will 
accumulate all of these commits. Meanwhile, maybe you also make some
completely separate changes on the main branch. Later, when the feature
branch is finished and has been tested you can merge it into the main
branch, at which point *all of the commits* on the feature branch will
be committed to main. The end product is exactly the same as if you
had never created the separate branch. Branching is only a convenience
that developers use for collaboration, or to work on multiple versions
of the code at the same time.

So, as I've said, you may not actually need to use branching for quite
some time. But let's walk through a quick example anyways just so you 
are familiar with it. Let's create a new branch called "feature". 
Try the following code, in order, and call `git status` at several 
points throughout to check in on what is happening with the files
or branch names being worked on.

```bash
# create a new branch called 'feature' and 
git branch feature

# switch to the new branch
git checkout branch

# make a change to an existing file.
echo "new text appended here." >> ./file-1.md

# stage the changes to this file
git add file-1.md

# commit the changes (this branch will be 1 commit ahead)
git commit -m "added appended message."

# we can now switch back to the main branch
git checkout main

# and merge the 'feature' branch into 'main'
git merge feature

# delete the feature branch (no longer needed)
git branch -d feature

# push the new changes on main to the remote (origin)
git push origin main
```

<br>

## Review and assessment

You've now seen two ways in which you can make changes to your 
local repo and push those changes to the remote on GitHub. The
first involves committing changes directly to your main branch, 
and overall just ignoring the branching process. This involves
only the three steps *add*, *commit*, and *push*. The second
alternative approach involves these same commands, but performs
them on a separately created branch that must be merged back into
the main branch.

In addition to these there are in fact many other 
ways in which you can use `git` to call these three steps. 
However, until you become very comfortable 
with this simple workflow I do not recommend trying to use
any other type of shortcut. Make sure you've *committed*
to memory the workflow: *add*, *commit*, *push*. 


### The GitHub Learning Lab
There are many great resources for learning git and its integration
with services like GitHub. One that I recommend is [https://lab.github.com/](https://lab.github.com/). Feel free to explore some of the free 
interactive courses that they offer for further training.


### Alternatives to the git command-line tool
Because learning the git command line tool is difficult, 
several alternatives have also been developed that incorporate
a graphical user interface, so that you do not need to use a 
shell or text editor at all. My belief is that you should 
first learn the command line framework to really understand 
how these commands work before you move to a more abstract 
form, otherwise you are likely to encounter problems, such as 
conflicts, and have a much harder time figuring out how to 
resolve them. 


### Assessment
Try to complete the following action by figuring out the appropriate
code to do so. This may be challenging, but all of the answers you 
need to complete the task are described above. 
Remember, git works like a time machine, so it is unlikely 
that you will mess anything up that cannot be 
undone. If you get a strange or unexpected message, try to google it
to find how to resolve it. And if you are still stuck, come visit
the course chatroom.

<div class="alert alert-block alert-success">
	<b>Action:</b> Complete the following steps.<br>
	1. Create a new file called file-4.md in hack-2-shell/ 
	and write one of the following two messages in it about 
	how you feel about learning git: 'crazy confusing'
	or 'easy peazy'<br>
	3. *add* file-4.md to your staging area for commit. <br>
	4. *commit* your changes with an informative message.<br>
	5. *push* your changes to origin main.<br>
	6. Look on GitHub to make sure your changes have appeared.
</div>

For your grade we will look for this file with the appropriate contents in your hack-2-shell repo on GitHub.