---
title: code-editors
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
layout: default
---

## Coding Text editors

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}


Code editors are an essential tool for any programmer/developer. 
They are designed to provide support that makes writing and 
testing large complex code easier. Every developer has their 
favorite code editor, with popular examples being vim, emacs, 
atom, sublimetext, and vscode. 

Most biologists first learn to code by typing directly into a shell, 
for example by starting an R or Python session in the terminal.
Interactive coding environments are also hugely popular, such 
as RStudio or Jupyter, which provide a code-editor-like experience,
where you can view or embed figures, see your variables, 
and even access useful features like tab-completion. 


## Why use a text editor
Code editors provide many more features than interactive coding 
environments, and/or make them available in a much faster and more
responsive way. This includes **syntax highlighting** 
(colorizing different components of code); **linting** (checking code
for style or syntax errors before you run it); **tab-completion** (and 
related documentation searching);
**building/executing** (allows you to test the code with single command);
**filetree organization** (easier to see all files in folders); 
and perhaps most important of all, **keybindings**. 

I emphasize keybindings because I think this is an essential skill
to learn and master. Keybindings are keyboard shortcuts for 
performing common tasks in a text editor. This 
includes mundane things like moving your cursor up one line, or to the 
end of a line, or highlighting and replacing all instances of the word
'foo' with 'bar'. Such common tasks are the bread and butter of 
programming. By learning to enter a set of keystrokes to perform these 
activities, rather than using the mouse to select items on the 
screen, your efficiency will improve 10X. In fact, once your learn a set
of keybindings well, you will become so comfortable and dependent on them
that you will find it exhausting to type text into other programs, such 
as MS Word, that do not support the same richness of key strokes.


## Which code editor should I use?
Our goal in this session is to get you started on using a modern 
text editor. For this class, we will focus on vscode. After this 
exercise, you can choose any other text editor you like, but I want
all of us to go through the motions of setting up and customizing 
at least one text editor together. 


You can choose whichevery you like, but if you are on WSL2, then you
should definitely choose vscode, since it has a lot of built-in 
functionality for interacting between your windows and linux systems. SublimeText is similar to vscode, but a bit more minimalist.
It is my preferred editor, so you will see me using it throughout the 
course, but I will use vscode as well to demonstrate its functionality.

## Install vscode



[read the vscode get-started guide](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/tips-and-tricks)

Watch intro videos 1-5:
[intros also available as videos](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/introvideos)







