---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
layout: default
title: github-pages
---

## Hosting static websites with GitHub pages

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}


### Learning objectives
This tutorial will walk you through the steps of creating
a personal website hosted on GitHub at a URL specified
by your username: `http://{github_username}.github.io`. 
By the end of this tutorial you will know how to create 
this website, and others, from your GitHub account. This 
tutorial will probably take 15-45 minutes to complete.


### GitHub pages
In addition to its many other uses, GitHub serves a similar 
role as LinkedIn for the tech industry, as a public social
network for sharing code and demonstrating your coding 
experience, and this extends similarly to fields in 
biology like bioinformatics and biotech.  
In fact, your GitHub profile can be an important resource 
when applying for jobs to show concrete examples of your work.

GitHub has embraced this status by providing tools and services 
that make it easier to share the contents of your GitHub repos 
not only using the standard GitHub interface, but also by serving 
those contents through customized webpages hosted by GitHub. This 
framework is generally referred to as GitHub pages.


### Static websites
More generally, github-pages is an example of a broader category of
websites called *static websites*. This generally
means that these sites are very simple, composed of only HTML, 
CSS, and JavaScript, with no back-end database and server
framework (e.g., PHP or Python). Thus, these sites do not 
offer as much user interaction options as more complicated
websites; but, as a trade-off, they are much easier to develop, 
and also faster and more secure. 

For these reasons static websites have become very popular
as a form of personal or lab website in Academia. There is 
a large community of developers who have created 
open-source web design themes and frameworks for easily styling 
static websites by cloning existing GitHub repos 
and simply substituting your details in place of the 
existing ones. Thus, you can create beautiful websites without
having to know any HTML or CSS at all. This sounds a bit like 
squarespace, right? Well, it pretty much is, except free.

GitHub has taken this approach one step further to make it even
easier to create static webpages. Any GitHub repo can be made into 
a static website simple by flipping a switch on GitHub. 
In its most basic form the Markdown content in the README file
will serve as content for the website and a default CSS theme 
will be applied, unless you add further styling yourself.

## Examples
As an example, my lab website 
([https://eaton-lab.org](https://eaton-lab.org))
was created as a github-pages site using a popular template available online
that I cloned from a GitHub repo. 
Similarly, our course website
([https://eaton-lab.org/hack-the-planet](https://eaton-lab.org/hack-the-planet))
is an example of a static github-pages website that I created using a different web design (bootstrap).
Both websites are simply a collection of files and folders hosted in a repo
on GitHub. (I went an extra step to pay for the domain name eaton-lab.org, 
but otherwise the basename of the site would be eaton-lab.github.io.)
You can view the repos at the following links:

- [https://github.com/eaton-lab/eaton-lab.github.io](https://github.com/eaton-lab/eaton-lab.github.io)
- [https://github.com/eaton-lab/hack-the-planet](https://github.com/eaton-lab/hack-the-planet)


## Steps to creating a Github pages site

1. Go to Github.com and selection New repository from the upper right corner.
Name the repository {username}.github.io, replacing {username} with your
GitHub username (and no curly brackets). Make the repository public and add a README file.

2. On the repositories webpage click on the Settings tab in the upper right corner (if your browser window is not expanded it may appear under 
a collapsable button appearing as "..."). You can set many
options for specific repositories under its Settings. Scroll
down until you find the section labeled GitHub Pages.

3. Click on the button under Source and select your main branch. 
It will then list an option for a folder name, set it to the 
default option (root). 

4. Select a Theme if you wish, or leave it as the default. This will
create a commit to your repository adding a file called `_config.yml`
which tells GitHub the theme to apply.

5. That's it. It may take 5-10 minutes for your website to first appear. 
Try visiting http://{username}.github.io (with your username) 
until you see it appear. 


## Editing your static website
By default this site will serve the contents of your README.md
file as the source of your website. In other words, you can 
fill the content of your website by writing in Markdown. Even 
though the Markdown language is very simple, you can actually 
create pretty nice looking websites using just this simple method, 
along with the pre-built themes.
If you are familiar with HTML, or want to learn it, 
you can actually *combine* HTML and Markdown into the same 
document. HTML and CSS will allow you to add a lot more styling.

To see an example visit the website of our example student Phylo
here: [http://hackers-test.github.io](http://hackers-test.github.io)
and check out their GitHub repo for an example of what the 
raw files look like: [https://github.com/hackers-test/hackers-test.github.io](https://github.com/hackers-test/hackers-test.github.io). 
You can see in this example that all of the content of site 
is just a few lines in the README file.


## How/why this works
GitHub builds these sites using a web framework called [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/). If you get very interested in this topic 
then I recommend reading through the jekyll documentation and 
learning more about how to develop these sites from scratch. In 
our example above, GitHub is doing most of the hard work for us.
But you can actually use GitHub in either way, having it run jekyll
behind the scenes, or by running jekyll yourself and uploading 
the contents to the repo. To see an example of the later see the
repo for our course website in the docs/ folder at 
[https://github.com/eaton-lab/hack-the-planet](https://github.com/eaton-lab/hack-the-planet).

The basename {username}.github.io will be reserved for you 
only for this specific reposotory that has this name. But, 
you can create webpages for other repositories by visiting their 
settings and enabling github-pages. For example, if you did this
for your hack-2-shell repo then it would become available at the
address https://{username}.github.io/hack-2-shell. 


## Academic websites
In some ways, this tutorial is just a fun exercise for learning
about git and GitHub, but on a more serious note, developing a 
professional academic website is an essential resource as part of 
your career development as a graduate student. 
It is a simple way to put your name, interests, papers, talks, 
etc. online, so that you have a google-searchable presence as 
a scientist. This website doesn't necessarily need to be the 
one you use, but it provides a simple way to make a site that 
not only serves this purpose, but for those who are in the 
know, also signals to them that you are tech-savvy enough to 
have created it.


## Assessment
Your assessment for this tutorial is intended to combine three 
elements that you have learned: (1) using Markdown; 
(2) using `git`; and (3) hosting sites on Github. 
You are meant to complete the following tasks using command 
line tools in your terminal.

<div class="alert alert-block alert-success">
	<b>Action:</b> Edit the content of your personal website on 
	GitHub to represent yourself (or your Github profile persona 
	if you are uncomfortable with sharing personal info). Make it professional, with a photo (of you or some topic) and a 
	description of your research or academic interests. 
	Spend some time on it, but it doesn't need to be exhaustive 
	for now, you can return and add more content to it at any 
	time later. 
</div>

Your grade for this assignment will be based on the following:

Part I:
- Edit the settings of a repo called {username}.github.io to make it into a Github-pages website (you likely already did this above).
- Clone the repo to your local computer at ~/hacks/{username}.github.io
- cd into the repo.
- Edit the README content using Markdown (and or HTML) to include 
at least some text *and an image*. Revisit the Markdown resources 
if you need help with this, and look at code in the examples linked above.
- add, commit, and push to origin main to view the changes at {username}.github.io.

Part II:
- using `mkdir` create a new directory called data/ in the repo.
- use `wget` to download a CSV file from https://eaton-lab.org/data/iris-data-dirty.csv to your repo.
- move this file into the data/ folder if not there already.
- use `git add` to stage the folder and file `data/iris-data-dirty.csv` for commit.
- use `git commit` to commit these changes.
- use `git push` to push these changes to your origin main.
- wait a few minutes and then visit {username}.github.io/data/iris-data-dirty.csv. You should be able to see or download the CSV 
file (depending on your browser).

Congratulations, you've created a personal website, and now you've 
also created a subfolder within it where you can store data files that
will be easily accessible from this web address. 
If the last step worked then you were successful. If not, there must have 
been an error somewhere. Keep trying. If you get stuck, visit the course
chatroom. 
