---

layout: default
---


4.2 Git 



### Cloning
Cloning creates an identical copy of a repository. 


### Forking
Forking creates an identical copy of a repository. That sounds the same
as cloning, right? Well, almost. The real difference between cloning and forking
has to do with *permissions*. When you fork a repository it is now housed
under your GitHub profile, meaning that you have permission to commit
or pull changes into a branch, rather than only make pull requests 
(asking the owner or someone with permissions to approve your changes).
The new fork is completely yours to do with as you please. The name fork
refers to a fork in a road; the idea that your new version may proceed
from the state it was in at the time of forking and evolve completely 
independently of the original. Although you do have the option
to sync changes between your new fork and the original repo using git.

### When should I clone versus fork
If you do not plan on **editing the code and contributing your changes 
back to the owner**, then you should just clone the repo. This simply 
downloads a copy of the source code onto your computer that
you can use or edit locally for testing. 

If you are working collaboratively on a repo **in a small group** (e.g., 
two people), then you may wish to share a single repo (only one person owns it),
but set permissions on it so that both users can commit changes (this can
be done in the settings tab of the repo). In this case both users would 
only need to clone the repo from the single owner, and both can push commits
to it. This is not best practice, but it is a bit simpler than the second user
having to merge their fork into the main repo frequently.

### How we will use forking for class
In this class I will occasionally ask you to fork a repo so that you 
will have a copy of it in your GitHub account. You will then be asked
to edit the repo and will be graded on the changes that you make to 
your repo. 




1. Go to link and find the <kbd>fork</kbd> button in the upper right corner.

2. Click on the <kbd>clone</kbd> button *on your fork* of the repo. 
When I say *on your fork* I mean to make sure you are looking at the webpage
showing your forked version and not the original version of the repo that you
forked from. You can check this by looking at the username in the upper left
corner of you screen. The original copy was from eaton-lab/

3. 




[git](https://lab.github.com/), [gitagain](http://rogerdudler.github.io/git-guide/)