---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
layout: default
title: jupyter
---


## Installing and using jupyter locally

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}


At this point you should already be familiar with 
[jupyter notebooks](https://jupyter.org/). We have previously connected
to and executed code in jupyter using the cloud-based service Binder. 
Binder involves a jupyter server running remotely (somewhere in the world) 
that you connect to and interact with through your browser. In contrast to 
this *remote* style of using notebooks, here we will learn to install and 
use jupyter *locally* on your own machine. 
In addition, we will dive a bit deeper into the format of jupyter notebooks,
and best practices for sharing them using GitHub.


### Installing Jupyter notebook
Install jupyter from conda-forge using the following command.
```bash
conda install notebook -c conda-forge
```

### Configuring your local notebook
Although it is not required, we can run a one-time 
[configuration](https://jupyter-notebook.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
of jupyter before starting it to set some preferences that will make
it easier to use. Call the command below to create a jupyter 
configuration file which will be stored in the .jupyter/ dir in 
your home directory.

```bash
jupyter-notebook --generate-config
```
Then store a password by running the command below. This is just a measure that
adds additional security.

```bash
jupyter-notebook password
```

Now we can start a jupyter notebook server with the following command. The 
option `--no-browser` is not necessary for everyone. For WSL2 users it will
hide a warning message that would otherwise pop up telling you that it cannot
open a browser automatically from your WLS2 system. Either way, once the server
is runnign we can open a browser on our own and connect to it by entering the 
URL addresss. 

```bash
# move to your home directory, and start a notebook server from here.
cd ~
jupyter-notebook --no-browser
```

If you entered the option above then it will not have automatically opened in 
your default browser. You will see that some text is being printed in the terminal.
We'll describe this in the next section. For now, open a new tab in the browser 
of your choice and in the address bar enter `localhost:8888`. 
You are telling it that there is a *local server* running on your computer, and 
that it is sending information to port number 8888. This is the default port 
number used by jupyter. 


### What is a server?
A server is a computer program that sends and receives information over
a network. Jupyter works as a server that runs a Python *kernel* (an open
session of Python) in the background, which processes information that it
receives, and sends outputs back. A web browser is the best way to interface
with a server, since it can use all of the power of web design to make a nice
interface for displaying outputs. This is the idea behind jupyter notebooks:
A python backend that uses and web-interface frontend for users to interact with.


### Jupyter filesystem interface
As you have seen before, the jupyter interface will show you a view of your 
filesystem, including folder and files, from which you can either select an 
existing file to open, or create a new one. Jupyter notebooks are saved in a 
file format with the suffix `.ipynb`, and these will appear with little 
notebook icons next to them. 


### Stopping the server
When you start a jupyter server in a terminal, you can just minimize that terminal
or stick it in a corner. The server will continue to function for as long as you 
have this server running. When you are done using, and have saved your notebooks, 
you can stop the server by closing it (or interrupt it by pressing ctrl-c). Try this
now by clicking on the terminal running the server and interrupting it. You can also
close the browser tabs that were open. You can start the notebook server again at any
time following the same commands be used above.


### Assessment
None, proceed to next tutorial where you will use jupyter.


{% comment %}

### Installing Jupyter Lab
Let's also try out a newer interface for using jupyter notebooks called
jupyter-lab. Some people prefer this version as it offers a wide range of
extensions. Whereas jupyter-notebook is very minimal, jupyter-lab can be 
thought of as a notebook ecosystem.

```bash
conda install jupyterlab -c conda-forge
```

```bash
jupyter-lab 
```

### Running jupyter-lab from VSCode
Remember that VSCode has a builtin terminal and server capabilities. 
The text editor uses these tools to connect to the Linux Subsystem 
when executing code through the editor that is installed on Linux, 
such as bash or Python. VSCode also uses this capability to make
it very easy to open and edit a jupyter notebook within the text
editor itself, rather than in a browser window. 

... is this preferred?


### Running a remote jupyter server
This is an advaned topic that we may return to a later date. 
Because jupyter notebook/lab serves content over a network from
the kernel to a browser, it is actually fairly straightforward for
the server to be running on one computer and the person connecting
to it to be using a browser on a different computer. This type of 
connection of course requires much greater security than to run 
jupyter on a single machine, since you do not want just anybody to
be able to connect to your jupyter server, since it would give them
nearly full access to your machine. 

```bash
# a server on machine X serving on port 9999
jupyter-lab --ip=$(hostname) --port=9999 --no-browser
```

```bash
# a user on machine Y securely connects to machine X:9999
# creating a tunnel that serves content to Y:9999
ssh -N -L 9999:X:9999 user@hostname.hpc.edu
```

The user would then leave this SSH tunnel open in a terminal on their 
laptop (machine Y) for as long as they want the tunnel connection 
to be established. The user could then open their browser to 
`localhost:9999` and they should have access to the notebook server.

The user stop the SSH tunnel at any time by closing the terminal and 
the notebook server would continue to run, just with nobody connecting
to it on the other end. When the user wishes to re-connect they simply
need to start the SSH tunnel again and refresh their browser.



### Assessment

<div class="alert-success">
	...
</div>

Your assignment is to open a new notebook for each chapter in ...

Copy examples 


{% endcomment %}