---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
layout: default
title: github-pages-advanced
---


## Advanced tips for your GitHub pages website

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}



### Github pages tip 1: shrink images for faster load times.
A simple way to make your site load much faster is to shrink
the size of any photos that need to be loaded. 
To do this, you could use a complex program like Photoshop,
or a simple command line tool like `convert`. I recommend
using an even simpler approach of uploading files to a website
called [tinyjpg](https://tinyjpg.com/) that will shrink them to a size that is optimal for displaying on the web.


### Github pages tip 2: YAML front matter for page templates
If you wish to create additional webpages using Markdown 
separate from your README file -- for example to use as 
a blog, or for writing notes, or for sharing/hosting some
kind of information -- you can do so by simply adding 
a special header to any Markdown files that you create.
The file must have what is called 
[YAML front matter](https://assemble.io/docs/YAML-front-matter.html), 
which is used internally by jekyll to apply HTML templates 
to your Markdown file. This simply means you need to add 
a section with two lines containing three dashed lines at the top
of the file. In the case of a simple GitHub-pages setup, 
this will apply the 'default' style of your selected Theme.

```markdown
---
---

### This is a post about ...
I love to write in *Markdown*...
```

In my example I created a new folder called *posts/* and added 
a file to it called *vacation.md*. Once I push these changes to 
GitHub my site will have new content viewable at 
[https://hackers-test.github.io/posts/vacation.html](https://hackers-test.github.io/posts/vacation.html).

Once again, to learn more about this topic you can dig into the 
Jekyll documentation. 

