---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
title: classes
layout: default
---

<style>
h3 {
    margin-top: 30px
}
pre {
    line-height: 1.5em;
}
pre code {
    font-size: 0.9em;
}
</style>


### Python classes

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}

The final Python object we have yet to learn is the `class` object. 
Classes are used to implement object-oriented design in Python. 
It is actually possible to use Python and even write Python programs
completely without ever creating a `class` object. Classes are not 
fundamental to Python. They are a design choice. But, by learning
to use `class` definitions in your code you will find that you are
able to write much better organized code that is easier to write
and to use.

### Learning objectives:
By the end of this tutorial you will:
- Understand why `class` objects are used in Python.
- Be familiar with the convention for defining custom classes.


### Everything is an object
You've heard this before: everything in Python is an object. 
An integer is an object, a list is an object, a module is 
an object. So far we have learned ways to combine these to accomplish
interesting tasks. But, the next frontier is to define your own
objects as custom classes. 


### Object-oriented programming
The goal of object-oriented design is to *organize* objects so that
they have an intuitive design where the attributes and functions of
an object are accessible from the object itself. We saw this before
when we learned about the basic object types in Python. List objects
have functions accessible from the object itself for appending and 
removing items, or counting and finding items in the list. We saw
the same thing for strings, dicts, and other object types.
So what is an example of a custom class? It could be anything. 
For example, we could create a custom class for storing student grades; 
the class could store the student's name and UNI, much like a string
object stores a variable, and it could have functions for storing new 
grades or accessing existing grades, much like a dictionary. Thus, 
our Student class object would be a hybrid between a string and dictionary
object, with function and attribute names specific to its intended task.


### Creating custom classes
New classes are created using the `class` statement, and by convention
are named using the CamelCase style, with capital letters for the start
of words, and underscores between words. (By contrast, the convention
for naming functions is snake_case, with only lowercase and using 
underscores.) 

Let's start by creating the most simple type of class, an empty one that
does nothing. I'll call it Box, since we can think of a class as a type
of container.

```python
# create a new simple class
class Box:
    def __init__(self):
        pass
```

You can see that the convention for creating a class object includes
defining a special function within the class, called `__init__`. Looks
familiar, right? We learned in the last tutorial that an init file is
automatically run when a package is imported. So what do you think the
init function does? That's right, it is automatically run when the class
object is created. This is referred to as the "init function", or 
as a "constructor function". In this simple example nothing happens within 
the init function. We just tell it to `pass` (do nothing). 



### `self`: what does it mean?
The init function *always* takes `self` as an argument. This is a special
name in Python that refers to an *instance* of a class. The init function
can take additional arguments in addition to self, but self will always be
the first argument.

To understand what an *instance* of a class is, let's create an example. 
You can follow along with this tutorial in a notebook. To create an 
instance of our Box class object we simply call it like a function to 
*initialize* an instance, and store it to a variable.

```python
# create an instance of the Box class
box = Box()
```

The `Box()` class constructor can be thought of as a **Box class factory**. 
Whenever called it returns a new instance of the box class. Thus, like the 
example below, we can create and store multiple instances of the Box class, 
each as a separate object.

```python
# create multiple instances
box1 = Box()
box2 = Box()
```

Class objects serve as useful containers since you can store any other object 
to them as an attribute and retrieve it later using the dot access.

```python
box1 = Box()
box1.text = "hello world"
print(box1.text)
```


### class init arguments
The example above only serves as a simple demonstration. Usually we will
want to initialize class object with some kind of attribute from their 
start. This can be done by providing additional arguments to the class
init function. Let's consider a new class:

```python
class Dog:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name
```

We now have a Dog class that will return instances that will already have
an attribute called `.name` that stores the string that is required
to be passed to the class constructor during init. We can now see clearly 
that if we initialize two separate instances of the class with different
names that the two instances will have different attributes.

```python
# init two Dog class instances
dog1 = Dog(name="Phylo")
dog2 = Dog(name="Hank")

# print the names of each instance
print(dog1.name)
print(dog2.name)
```


### class functions
Class objects become really useful once you start to define custom functions.
This is especially aesthetically pleasing, compared to a non-object oriented 
approach, since all of the information about the current instance is available
to the functions, such that they usually only need to take `self` as an argument,
rather than entering many arguments to a function. This is demonstrated below.

Let's add some additional arguments to init, and define some custom functions
of our dog class object.

```python
class Dog:
    def __init__(self, name, weight):
        self.name = name
        self.weight = weight

    def speak(self):
        """
        Returns Dog's speech as a string. Larger dogs speak in all caps.
        """
        if self.weight > 30:
            print(f"Bork, hi my name is {self.name}!".upper())
        else:
            print(f"Bork, hi my name is {self.name}")
```

Now let's try using this class with instances that are defined by different
input arguments. Notice two things: we were able to define a function (speak)
that performs differently depending on the properties of the instance (its weight);
and second that we were able to define the `speak()` function to work this
way without us having to pass it the name or weight of the instance as arguments, 
since the `speak()` function can access these attributes from `self`. 

```python
dog1 = Dog(name="Phylo", weight=25)
dog1.speak()
```
<pre style="background-color: lightgray; padding:10px">Bork, hi my name is phylo
</pre>

```python
dog2 = Dog(name="Hank", weight=40)
dog2.speak()
```
<pre style="background-color: lightgray; padding:10px">BORK, HI MY NAME IS HANK!
</pre>


### Thinking of object design
The examples above may still seem a bit abstract, and simple. But as we collect
more and more functions that operate of the same set of information -- in this 
case a Dog's name and weight -- it becomes simpler to have these organized into
a single object, rather than as many separate functions that each take name and 
weight as arguments.

Let's consider the example task we defined in tutorial 7.1 on *thinking functionally*:

<div class="blockquote alert alert-light" style="font-size: 0.9em">
As an example, let's imagine our coding task is to search a database
of biomedical publications in PDF format and to count all mentions 
or references of any gene names that exist in a Human Genome database. 
Before you even begin this task you should start by creating an outline of 
the atomized tasks involved. For example, we could break this problem into 
a number of functions where each accomplishes one of the following tasks:

<ul>
    <li>extract gene names from a biomedical database into a dict object mapping names to integer 0.</li>
    <li>check for special formatting of gene names and attempt to standardize (e.g., make all uppercase).</li>
    <li>extract text from PDFs into a dictionary mapping article name to contents.</li>
    <li>parse article text into list of words and format to match gene names (e.g., all uppercase).</li>
    <li>iterate over articles counting occurrence of all gene names among word lists in each.</li>
    <li>format the count results dictionary into a table and print to a file or stdout.</li>
</ul>
</div>

If I were planning to accomplish this task I would organize it into a class with the following
outline, starting with empty functions definitions that I would then begin to fill in as I 
coded each in turn. 

```python
class CountGenesInPDFs:
    def __init__(self, gene_database, pdf_database):
        # store input arguments
        self.gene_database = gene_database
        self.pdf_database = pdf_database

        # attributes to fill with function calls
        self.count_dict = {}
        self.article_dict = {}

    def extract_gene_names_from_database(self):
        "extract genes names from database and store in count_dict as {gene_name: 0}"
        pass

    def standardize_gene_names(self):
        "standardize gene names in self.count_dict()"
        pass

    def extract_text_from_pdfs(self):
        "extract text from pdfs and store in article_dict {filename: test-string}"
        pass

    def parse_article_text_into_wordlist(self):
        "parse text in article_dict values into a list of words"
        pass

    def count_genes_in_articles(self):
        "iterate over articles in article_dict and store counts in count_dict"
        pass

    def count_genes(self):
        "the main function that returns a dictionary with counts of genes in all articles"
        self.extract_gene_names_from_database()
        self.standardize_gene_names()
        self.extract_text_from_pdfs()
        self.parse_article_text_into_wordlist()
        self.count_genes_in_articles()
        return self.count_dict
```

We had the plan of defining 6 different functions to accomplish our task. Each of these
functions would take one or more arguments as an input, and we would need to pass the 
output from some of them into others. This workflow is made much easier by using a class.
Here we *only* need to pass the arguments to the class constructor, and then the class
object makes it possible to call only a single function (`self.count_genes()`) to run
all of the six functions to accomplish the task. In addition, we were able to mock up
an outline of the entire workflow before we even begin coding the functions themselves.
This design principle helps you to decide what is the best order and flow to accomplish
your task before you even really begin to code.

Now, if the functions were all defined to accomplish their goals, as opposed to just 
calling `pass`, we would be able to accomplish our task by just running the following:

```python
counter = CountGenesInPDFs(gene_database, pdf_database)
counter.count_genes()
```


### Reiterate
Watch the following video for further reiteration of how to create and use classes, 
including more advanced topics. This example demonstrates how to write and test Python
scripts from within a text editor (in this case sublimetext). We will learn to 
to do this in the next set of tutorials.

<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9">
    <iframe class="embed-responsive-item" width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ZDa-Z5JzLYM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos.
</div>




<hr>

There is no assessment for this tutorial.