---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
title: sublimetext3
layout: default
---

<style>
h2 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
h3 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
</style>


## Sublimetext3

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}

Most biologists first learn to code by typing directly into a shell, 
for example by starting an R or Python session in the terminal.
Interactive coding environments are also hugely popular, such 
as RStudio or Jupyter, which provide a code-editor-like experience,
where you can view or embed figures, see your variables, 
and even access useful features like tab-completion. 

Code editors provide many more features than interactive coding 
environments, and/or make them available in a much faster and/or
prettier way. This includes **syntax highlighting** 
(colorizing different components of code); **linting** (checking code
for style or syntax errors before you run it); **tab-completion** (and 
related documentation searching); **building/executing** 
(allows you to test the code with single command);
**filetree organization** (easier to see all files in folders); 
and perhaps most important of all, **keybindings**. 


### Learning objectives
In this tutorial you will learn to setup `sublimetext3` for Python development.

<div class="alert alert-danger">
    If you are using WSL2 then I do not recommend using SublimeText as your
    coding editor. You should instead follow instructions in the vscode 
    tutorial to setup visual studio code as your preferred editor.
</div>


### Popular text editors for coding
There are many coding text editors available, ranging from complex to simple, 
and many have a devoted cult following. Nevertheless, the relative popularity 
of many older editors has recently began to wane as two modern editors 
have become widely established as top choices: `sublimetext3` and `vscode`. 
These have mostly replaced previous contenders including `atom`, `emacs`, 
and `vim`. 

**History:**
Emacs and Vim have been around the longest and have historically been pitted 
against each other as a sort of zero-sum battle to the death. Everyone learns 
one or the other, completely falls in love with their choice, and abhors 
the competing editor. This is partly because they are so different in style, 
and when you get comfortable with one it feels unnatural to change. 
You are welcome to use any text editor you want for this class, but for 
*this* assignmnet I ask that you try to install and configure a text-editor 
following *either* this tutorial (sublimetext3), or the other (vscode).


### Why sublimetext?
I personally recommend sublimetext3. It is lightweight while also being 
super extensible. Compared to vscode it lacks a few key features (like a
built-in terminal) that set vscode apart, but I am fine with keeping a shell 
open to the side of my editor. Sublime starts up faster, and by default, it 
*tries to do less* than vscode -- it is more minimal.
The default setup for vscode examines your entire operating system and tries 
to recommend many extensions to you: "I see you are on wsl2, do you want me to 
install the wsl2 extension?"; I see that you don't have a linter installed,
do you want me to install one?" I find this a bit annoying and intrusive. 
It leaves you with less knowledge of your setup, since the program 
tries to do it all for you. Instead, this tutorial will walk you through 
a more step-by-step approach to setting up your editor, and in the end 
I think you will have a better idea on how to toggle or edit these options. 
Another cool feature of sublimetext is that the program itself is written 
in Python!


## Install SublimeText3
To install sublimetext3 go to 
[https://www.sublimetext.com/3](https://www.sublimetext.com/3)
and download the appropriate installer for your system. If you are on a mac 
then after downloading the DMG file click to open it and run the installer.
When finished it should show you a folder with Applications/ and a SublimeText
icon in it. Just drag the icon into your Applications folder and you are done.
You can then remove the DMG installer file (e.g., drag it to Trash).


### Start `subl` from the terminal
For some reason the default installation method on OSX does not install 
the `subl` binary into your PATH. This means that initially you can only 
start sublimetext by clicking on the icon in your Applications bar, and then 
finding the file or folder that you want to open from within sublimetext. 
That's fine, but it feels a bit slow to me. More often, you will
find yourself working in your terminal, `cd`'d into a directory that you are working
on, and you will then decide you want to open sublimetext *from within that location*.
It's convenient to be able to open your editor to a view of your current directory.
So, the first customized setup option we are going to configure is to setup 
the `subl` binary (if you are on Linux you'll already have it).

Here is a demonstration of what we will enable:
<div class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9 mb-3">
    <video controls>
        <source src="./videos/subl.webm" type="video/webm">
        Sorry, your browser doesn't support embedded videos.
    </video>
</div>

To enable this we will create a new symlink, called `subl`, that will be 
located in your PATH and point to the installed sublimetext binary in Applications.
Up to this point in class we have only installed local software using `conda`. 
Here we are instead installing a tool that we want to be available system-wide. 
To make this work we will add the symlink to a location where other binaries 
are located globally, in `/usr/local/bin/`.
You will need permissions to write the symlink into this location, so the 
following will ask for your password. Be sure to use tab-completion when writing the 
filepaths below to make sure you do not enter a typo.

```bash
sudo ln -s "/Applications/Sublime Text.app/Contents/SharedSupport/bin/subl" /usr/local/bin/subl
```

Perfect. Now that `subl` is in your PATH you can call it from any location from 
your terminal. Try it out for youself now. In your terminal use `cd` to 
navigate to the `~/hacks` directory and start sublimetext to see all of your
repos for this class in one place in your text editor. Or, you can just enter
the filepath of your hacks folder as the target to `subl` like in the example
below:

```bash
subl ~/hacks/
```

Now that you have opened a folder with sublimetext you should see 
a list of folders and/or files in the left sidebar. Navigate by clicking
on the folders and select a Python module (.py file) from the hack-7 
session (or any Python file for now). You should see the text of the file
display in the main window of sublimetext, and it should also detect the
type of code and automatically color it appropriately (syntax highlighting).


## The command palette
All of Sublimetext is centered around a feature called the command palette.
This is a place where you can access all of the options from the dropdown
menus, as well as hundreds of additional options for performing operations
in the editor. Many of these have keyboard shortcuts, as we will discuss
further below, but many others do not, and can only be accessed by finding
them in the command palette. To open the command palette on a Mac press
<kbd>cmd+shift+p</kbd>. You can press this key combination again to close
the command palette. The command palette serves as a search bar, so you 
can begin to type any keywords associated with a command and it will filter
the list of possible solutions to match your entry.


## Hotkeys and keybindings
When describing the benefits of learning a text editor I emphasize that 
keybindings are one of the most important features. These are learned
key-strokes that can be used to accomplish repetitive tasks more efficiently.
This includes mundane things like moving your cursor up one line, or to the 
end of a line, or highlighting and replacing all instances of the word
'foo' with 'bar'. Such common tasks are the bread and butter of 
programming. By learning to enter a set of keystrokes to perform these 
activities, rather than using the mouse to select items on the 
screen, your efficiency will improve 10X. In fact, once your learn a set
of keybindings well, you will become so comfortable and dependent on them
that you will likely find it exhausting to type text into any other programs,
such as MS Word, that does not support the same richness of key strokes.

How do you learn keybindings? Well, you just learned your first one above, 
the key-stroke <kbd>cmd+shift+p</kbd> to open the command palette. Learning
others will take time and practice, but it is worth it. My best tips for
learning are to: (1) pick a text editor and stick with it; use the text-editor
frequently (take notes with it, write documents and code in it); (3) 
when you find yourself reaching for the mouse, stop yourself, and instead
search for the appropriate keystroke and try to infuse it to your muscle 
memory.

How to look up keybindings? It depends which keybindings you are trying to 
learn. SublimeText3 has a default set of keybindings, and those may be the
easiest for you to learn, but you also have the choice of installing 
alternatives. We'll return to this subject in a minute after learning 
about how to install packages.


### Package Control
One of the best features of sublimetext is the rich community of developers
that create open source packages to extend its capabilities. We will install
a few of these now to demonstrate their utility. First, you will need to 
install the feature that allows you to search for other packages, called
"Package Control". To do this, open the command palette and type 
<i>Install Package Control</i> and select it. After about one second it 
should finish and you are now ready to install packages.

You can now use the following steps to install any package:
- open the command palette (<kbd>cmd+shift+p</kbd>)
- type <i>install package</i> and select "package control: install package"
- enter the name of the program you wish to install and select the match from
 the dropdown list.
- wait for installation to finish (usually a new tab will pop-up to provide 
info on the installed package, you can close this after skimming it).

Let's try it first with a simple package called <i>bracket highlighter</i>.
This does exactly what it says, it highlights the brackets on either side of
your selection when writing code, making it easier to see which bracket closes
a given context. Simply follow the 4-step instructions above to install it.

If that worked, then continue to install all of the following packages:
- bracket highlighter: highlights the matching bracket in code.
- color highlight: shows the color of colors (useful for writing CSS).
- git gutter: highlights in the gutter which lines have changed.
- sublimelinter: enables linters.
- jedi: provides Python autocompletion like in Jupyter.
- emacs pro essentials: enables emacs keybindings.


### Disable or Enable packages
If you download a package and decide that you no longer like what it does, 
you can simply turn it off by typing "disable package" into the command 
palette and selecting the name of the package you want to disable. (Note:
for some packages that affect the look/style of subl you will need to 
restart it for them to take effect.) Try this now by disabling the package 
'emacs pro essentials'.


### Keybindings revisited
You now have two options for key-bindings, either the default sublime keys,
or the set in your disabled package 'emacs pro essentials'. There are other
options as well, such as a package that emulates the keybindings in 'vim'. 
In addition to these, you can actually define any keybindings you want by 
editing your settings in sublime; simply type keybindings into the command
palette it will open up a new window showing you the default system keys
on the left, and with a space to write commands to override those on the right.
You can mix and match any keys you like. Close this window for now.

The default keybindings in sublime is built especially for this editor, 
and thus works the most seamlessly, but is highly specific to sublime. 
The emacs keyset on the other hand uses many of the same keybindings
that also work in your terminal, and so learning these provides utility that 
is more broadly transferrable. Personally, I'm hooked on emacs keybindings 
and I'll never change. But if you're learning for the first time you may 
consider one of the alternatives. Even if you implement the emacs or vim 
keys in sublime all of its other features are still available to you either 
through different keystrokes, or through the command palette. 

- To learn the sublime keybindings install the 'sublime tutor' package.
- To learn emacs keybindings:
    - read the [README](https://github.com/sublime-emacs/sublemacspro)
    - the most commonly used keys are listed under the [navigation section](https://github.com/sublime-emacs/sublemacspro#emacs-navigation-commands), which is where 
    the emacs keybindings really excel, for moving up/down/left/right over
    lines and characters.


## Configuring for your Python environment
For some extensions to work properly they must be able to find the 
specific Python installation that you want them to use. In this case we 
of course will want sublime to find our conda installed version of Python
and its packages.

To test that your build system and linter is properly configured we will 
test it on a Python module. Use git to clone the following repository 
into your `~/hacks` directory and open the directory in sublime.

```bash
cd ~/hacks
git clone https://github.com/hackers-test/hack-9-python
subl .
```


### Configuring a build system
<div class="alert alert-info">
Note: If you do not see a sidebar showing the file and folders on the left-hand
side of the editor, open the command palette and type "sidebar" and you will
see an option to toggle the sidebar view.
</div>

Navigate to the file called `darwinday.py` in the sidebar file browser. Once
the file is opened, use the dropdown menu to select Tools, Build System, and
then Automatic. Now press <kbd>CMD+B</kbd> to <i>build</i> the script, 
meaning that it will execute the script as if it had been called from the 
terminal. The 'automatic' mode should provide a dropdown asking you which 
build system to use. Select Python, which tells it to execute the current
file using the default Python build settings. This is equivalent to calling
`python darwinday.py` from a terminal. Because this python module 
has a `__main__` dunder region at the end designating which part of the
code is meant to be run as an executable, it should run that part of the 
code and print the output in a build-results window that will pop up from
the bottom of sublime. It should print a few strings of text.


You can use the sublime 
[build system](https://www.sublimetext.com/docs/3/build_systems.html) 
to modify the way in which your code is executed in sublime. One example 
would be if you had multiple conda environments for different versions of 
Python. You could create a build system for each one to use to test your 
code easily with each version. Let's create a build system that specifically
points to your conda Python version. For this we'll follow instructions from
the link above. First open your command palette and type "New Build System".
This will open a new file called Unititled.sublime-build. Edit the file
so that it looks like the example below (replacing the 
`/home/deren/miniconda3/...` part with the appropriate path to your miniconda3
python). You can not use a `~` as a shortcut here, you must write the full 
path. Then save the file and it should ask you to save it in 
`~/Library/Application Support/Sublime Text 3/Packages/User` where you should
name it "python3.sublime-build".

```bash
{
    "cmd": ["/home/deren/miniconda3/bin/python", "$file"],
    "selector": "source.python",
    "file_regex": "^\\s*File \"(...*?)\", line ([0-9]*)"
}
```

Now when you try to build a Python file by pressing <kbd>CMD+B</kbd> it will
ask you to select either python or python3 as the build option, and you can 
choose the latter to build with your latest version of Python. To set this as
the default choice go to the tool bar and select Tools, Build System, python3.


### Configuring your linters
In the last session you installed several linters, we can now configure 
sublime to use one or more of these to display errors in your code. Let's 
focus on just using pylint for now. Above we installed the `sublimelinter`
package, and so now all we need to do is to configure it. In your command
palette type "sublimelinter settings" and select it. This will open a new
window showing defaults on the left, and an empty space for you preferences
on the right. Here you should edit the right side to look like below:

```bash
{
    "lint_mode": "load_save",
    "linters": {
        "pylint": {
            "executable": "~/miniconda3/bin/pylint"
        }
    },
}
```

This tells your linter to only run and look for new errors whenever you save
the file. This will keep it from bogging down your editor and making it run 
slower. This is good practice because every time you want to see if there are
errors in your code, you will also auto-save your code, which will prevent you
from losing progress. (In emacs key mode save is <kbd>ctrl-x + ctrl-s</kbd>, 
in sublime-mode it is <kbd>cmd-s</kbd>.)
The second thing this settings does is tell sublime exactly where your 
pylint executable is located. This helps ensure it will run correctly.
The third part tells sublime where to find your conda installed Python
packages.


### Configuring jedi
Jedi is an auto-completion engine for Python that can show you possible 
endings for the code that you begin to type, and makes docstrings easily 
available for reading. You can already used it when working in jupyter, since
it is pre-installed. Above you installed the sublimetext jedi package.
You may need to restart your sublime for it to fully work. This package will
show docstrings for functions when you hover your cursor over them, and it 
will (sometimes) auto-complete the options for functions. These settings can
be toggled. I like the docstring feature but do not like the auto-complete
feature. I usually disable jedi, but it may be useful for you as a beginner.
Here are [instructions](https://packagecontrol.io/packages/Jedi%20-%20Python%20autocompletion) for configuring if you want to change it from the defaults. 
To ensure sublime can find your jedi installation from conda add the following
to your sublime settings (not linter settings):

```bash
"python_package_paths": [
    "~/miniconda3/pkgs"
],
```

## Video tutorial
Congratulations, your sublimetext3 editor is now configured like a pro. In 
addition to this tutorial you may additionally want to watch the following 
video which demonstrates several similar topics. This user also discusses
the topic of build systems, and spends a bit more time on installing extra
packages to change the look and style of sublime. Take note, I *do not* 
recommend following his instructions to install and use the anaconda 
sublime package. This is basically a replacement for sublime-linter and 
sublime-jedi together. Instead, I recommend my instructions above for 
configuring each separately, and ensuring they work with your Python 
installation.

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xFciV6Ew5r4&list=PLhTkemNnJsDxIanxLUhqjxE0PT21HlFq3&index=2&ab_channel=CoreySchafer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xFciV6Ew5r4&list=PLhTkemNnJsDxIanxLUhqjxE0PT21HlFq3&index=2&ab_channel=CoreySchafer)