---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
title: sublimetext3
layout: default
---

<style>
h2 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
h3 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
</style>


## VS Code tutorial

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}

Most biologists first learn to code by typing directly into a shell, 
for example by starting an R or Python session in the terminal.
Interactive coding environments are also hugely popular, such 
as RStudio or Jupyter, which provide a code-editor-like experience,
where you can view or embed figures, see your variables, 
and even access useful features like tab-completion. 

Code editors provide many more features than interactive coding 
environments, and/or make them available in a much faster and/or
prettier way. This includes **syntax highlighting** 
(colorizing different components of code); **linting** (checking code
for style or syntax errors before you run it); **tab-completion** (and 
related documentation searching); **building/executing** 
(allows you to test the code with single command);
**filetree organization** (easier to see all files in folders); 
and perhaps most important of all, **keybindings**. 


### Learning objectives
In this tutorial you will learn to setup VSCode (`code`) for Python development.
The instructions for this tutorial will assume that you have Ubuntu 
installed through WSL2. 


### Popular text editors for coding
There are many coding text editors available, ranging from complex to simple, 
and many have a devoted cult following. Nevertheless, the relative popularity 
of many older editors has recently began to wane as two modern editors 
have become widely established as top choices: `sublimetext3` and `vscode`. 
These have mostly replaced previous contenders including `atom`, `emacs`, 
and `vim`. 

**History:**
Emacs and Vim have been around the longest and have historically been pitted 
against each other as a sort of zero-sum battle to the death. Everyone learns 
one or the other, completely falls in love with their choice, and abhors 
the competing editor. This is partly because they are so different in style, 
and when you get comfortable with one it feels unnatural to change. 
You are welcome to use any text editor you want for this class, but for 
*this* assignmnet I ask that you try to install and configure a text-editor 
following *either* this tutorial (sublimetext3), or the other (vscode).



### Install visual studio code
Look in the microsoft store for visual studio code, select it, 
and it will open your browser to a download page.
From the links on this page be sure to download and 
install "Visual Studio Code", not "Visual Studio 2019".


<div class="alert alert-info">
The first time you open VSCode it should recognize that WSL2
is installed on your system and ask if you want to install 
the vscode extension. Say yes. It may also ask you to install other things
at this point, for now, please say no.
</div>


### Start `code` from the terminal
A strength of using a text editor is that you can view an entire project file
tree at once. To do this you will want to open a folder in vscode, as opposed
to an individual script. The easiest way to do this is to navigate to the 
location that you want to open by using `cd` in your terminal, and then calling
`code .` to say open <i>this location</i> with `code`.

Try it out for youself now. In your terminal use `cd` to navigate to 
the `~/hacks` directory and type `code .` to see all of your
repos for this class in one place in your text editor. Or, you could 
alternatively enter the filepath of your hacks folder as the target 
to `code` like in the example below:

```bash
code ~/hacks/
```

Now that you have opened a folder with VS Code you should see 
a list of folders and/or files in the left sidebar. Navigate by clicking
on the folders and select a Python module (.py file) from the hack-7 
session (or any Python file for now). You should see the text of the file
display in the main window of sublimetext, and it should also detect the
type of code and automatically color it appropriately (syntax highlighting).


## Tutorials

Below are links to text and video tutorials for setting up vscode. I have 
two important instructions that you should follow that differs from these
tutorials. 

1. When it says to install Python skip this step, since you already have 
Python installed through conda.
2. When it says to install additional software such as an autoformater or 
linter, do not do this, instead 'select' from one that we already installed,
such as pylint or black.


Video tutorial: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-nh9rCzPJ20](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-nh9rCzPJ20)

Text tutorial: [https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/python-tutorial). 

